Project Gutenberg's Daphne, An Autumn Pastoral, by Margaret Pollock Sherwood

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: Daphne, An Autumn Pastoral

Author: Margaret Pollock Sherwood

Posting Date: March 23, 2009 [EBook #2438]
Release Date: December, 2000

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAPHNE, AN AUTUMN PASTORAL ***




Produced by Stephanie L. Johnson.  HTML version by Al Haines.









DAPHNE, AN AUTUMN PASTORAL


by

Margaret Sherwood




CHAPTER I

"Her Excellency,--will she have the politeness," said Daphne slowly,
reading from a tiny Italian-English phrase-book, "the politeness
to"--She stopped helpless.  Old Giacomo gazed at her with questioning
eyes.  The girl turned the pages swiftly and chose another phrase.

"I go," she announced, "I go to make a walk."

Light flashed into Giacomo's face.

"Si, si, Signorina; yes, yes," he assented with voice and shoulders and
a flourish of the spoon he was polishing. "Capisco; I understand."

Daphne consulted her dictionary.

"Down there," she said gravely, pointing toward the top of the great
hill on whose side the villa stood.

"Certainly," answered Giacomo with a bow, too much pleased by
understanding when there was no reason for it to be captious in regard
to the girl's speech.  "The Signorina non ha paura, not 'fraid?"

"I'm not afraid of anything," was the answer in English. The Italian
version of it was a shaking of the head. Then both dictionary and
phrase-book were consulted.

"To return," she stated finally, "to return to eat at six hours." Then
she looked expectantly about.

"Assunta?" she said inquiringly, with a slight shrug of her shoulders,
for other means of expression had failed.

"Capisco, capisco," shouted Giacomo in his excitement, trailing on the
marble floor the chamois skin with which he had been polishing the
silver, and speaking in what seemed to his listener one word of a
thousand syllables.

"The-Signorina-goes-to-walk-upon-the-hills-above-the-villa-because-
it-is-a-most-beautiful-day.-She-returns-to-dine-at-six-and-wishes-
Assunta-to-have-dinner-prepared.-Perhaps-the-Signorina-would-
tell-what-she-would-like-for-her-dinner?-A-roast-chicken,-yes?-
A-salad,-yes?"

Daphne looked dubiously at him, though he had stated the case with
entire accuracy, and had suggested for her solitary meal what she most
liked. There was a slight pucker in her white forehead, and she
vouchsafed no answer to what she did not understand.

"Addio, addio," she said earnestly.

"A rivederla!" answered Giacomo, with a courtly sweep of the chamois
skin.

The girl climbed steadily up the moist, steep path leading to the deep
shadow of a group of ilex trees on the hill. At her side a stream of
water trickled past drooping maidenhair fern and over immemorial moss.
Here and there it fell in little cascades, making a sleepy murmur in
the warm air of afternoon.

Halfway up the hill Daphne paused and looked back. Below the yellow
walls of the Villa Accolanti, standing in a wide garden with
encompassing poplars and cypresses, sketched great grassy slopes and
gray-green olive orchards.  The water from the stream, gathered in a
stone basin at the foot of the hill, flowed in a marble conduit through
the open hall.  As she looked she was aware of two old brown faces
anxiously gazing after her.  Giacomo and Assunta were chattering
eagerly in the doorway, the black of his butler's dress and the white
of his protecting apron making his wife's purple calico skirt and red
shoulder shawl look more gay. They caught the last flutter of the
girl's blue linen gown as it disappeared among the ilexes.

"E molto bello, very beautiful, the Signorina," remarked Assunta. "What
gray eyes she has, and how she walks!"

"But she knows no speech," responded her husband.

"Ma che!" shouted Assunta scornfully, "she talks American.  You
couldn't expect them to speak like us over there.  They are not Romans
in America."

"My brother Giovanni is there," remarked Giacomo.  "She could have
learned of him."

"She is like the Contessa," said Assunta.  "You would know they are
sisters, only this one is younger and has something more sweet."

"This one is grave," objected Giacomo as he polished.  "She does not
smile so much.  The Contessa is gay.  She laughs and sings and her
cheeks grow red when she drinks red wine, and her hair is more yellow."

"She makes it so!" snapped Assunta.

"I have heard they all do in Rome," said Giacomo.  "Some day I would
like to go to see."

"To go away, to leave this girl here alone with us when she had just
arrived!"  interrupted Assunta.  "I have no patience with the Contessa."

"But wasn't his Highness's father sick?  And didn't she have to go?
Else they wouldn't get his money, and all would go to the younger
brother.  You don't understand these things, you women." Giacomo's
defense of his lady got into his fingers, and added much to the
brightness of the spoons.  The two talked together now, as fast as
human tongues could go.

Assunta.  She could have taken the Signorina.

Giacomo.  She couldn't.  It's fever.

Assunta.  She could have left her maid.

Giacomo.  Thank the holy father she didn't!

Assunta.  And without a word of language to make herself understood.

Giacomo.  She can learn, can't she?

Assunta.  And with the cook gone, too!  It's a great task for us.

Giacomo.  You'd better be about it!...  Going walking alone in the
hills!  And calling me "Excellency."  There's no telling what Americans
will do.

Assunta.  She didn't know any better.  When she has been here a week
she won't call you "Excellency"!  I must make macaroni for dinner.

Giacomo.  Ma che!  Macaroni?  Roast chicken and salad.

Assunta.  Niente!  Macaroni!

Giacomo.  Roast chicken!  You are a pretty one to take the place of the
cook!

Assunta.  Roast chicken then!  But what are you standing here for in
the hall polishing spoons?  If the Contessa could see you!

Assunta dragged her husband by the hem of his white apron through the
great marble-paved dining-room out into the smoke-browned kitchen in
the rear.

"Now where's Tommaso, and how am I going to get my chicken?" she
demanded.  "And why, in the name of all the saints, should an American
signorina's illustrious name be Daphne?"



CHAPTER II

An hour later it was four o'clock.  High, high up among the sloping
hills Daphne sat on a great gray stone.  Below her, out beyond olive
orchards and lines of cypress, beyond the distant stone pines,
stretched the Campagna, rolling in, like the sea that it used to be,
wave upon wave of color, green here, but purple in the distance, and
changing every moment with the shifting shadows of the floating clouds.
Dome and tower there, near the line of shining sea, meant Rome.

Full sense of the enchantment of it all looked out of the girl's face.
Wonder sat on her forehead, and on her parted lips.  It was a face
serious, either with persistent purpose or with some momentary trouble,
yet full of an exquisite hunger for life and light and space.  Eyes and
hair and curving cheek,--all the girl's sensitive being seemed
struggling to accept the gift of beauty before her, almost too great to
grasp.

"After this," she said half aloud, her far glance resting on Rome in
the hazy distance, "anything is possible."

"I don't seem real," she added, touching her left hand with the
forefinger of her right.  "It is Italy, ITALY, and that is Rome. Can
all this exist within two weeks of the rush and jangle of Broadway?"

There was no answer, and she half closed her eyes, intoxicated with
beauty.

A live thing darted across her foot, and she looked down to catch a
glimpse of something like a slender green flame licking its way through
the grass.

"Lizards crawling over me unrebuked," she said smiling.  "Perhaps the
millenium has come."

She picked two grass blades and a single fern.

"They aren't real, you know," she said, addressing herself.  "This is
all too good to be true.  It will fold up in a minute and move away for
the next act, and that will be full of tragedy, with an ugly
background."

The heights still invited.  She rose, and wandered on and up. Her step
had the quick movement of a dweller in cities, not the slow pace of
those who linger along country roads, keeping step with nature.  In the
cut and fashion of her gown was evinced a sophistication, and a high
seriousness, possibly not her own.

She watched the deep imprint that her footsteps made in the soft grass.

"I'm half afraid to step on the earth here," she murmured to herself.
"It seems to be quivering with old life."

The sun hung lower in the west.  Of its level golden beams were born a
thousand shades of color on the heights and in the hollows of the
hills.  Over all the great Campagna blue, yellow, and purple blended in
an autumn haze.

"Oh!" cried the girl, throwing out her arms to take in the new sense of
life that came flooding in upon her.  "I cannot take it in.  It is too
great."


As she climbed, a strength springing from sheer delight in the wide
beauty before her came into her face.

"It was selfish, and I am going to take it back.  To-night I will write
and say so.  I could face anything now."

This hill, and then the side of that; one more gate, then Daphne turned
for another look at Rome and the sea.  Rome and the sea were gone.
Here was a great olive orchard, there a pasture touching the sky, but
where was anything belonging to her? Somewhere on the hills a lamb was
bleating, and near the crickets chirped. Yes, it was safe, perfectly
safe, yet the blue gown moved where the heart thumped beneath it.

A whistle came floating down the valley to her.  It was merry and
quick, but it struck terror to the girl's breast.  That meant a man.
She stood and watched, with terrified gray eyes, and presently she saw
him:  he was crashing through a heavy undergrowth of bush and fern not
far away.  Daphne gathered her skirts in one hand and fled.  She ran as
only an athletic girl can run, swiftly, gracefully. Her skirt fluttered
behind her; her soft dark hair fell and floated on the wind.

The whistle did not cease, though the man was motionless now. It
changed from its melody of sheer joy to wonder, amazement, suspense.
It took on soothing tones; it begged, it wheedled.  So a mother would
whistle, if mothers whistled, over the cradle of a crying child, but
the girl did not stop.  She was running up a hill, and at the top she
stood, outlined in blue, against a bluer sky.  A moment later she was
gone.

Half an hour passed.  Cautiously above the top of the hill appeared a
girl's head.  She saw what she was looking for:  the dreaded man was
sitting on the stump of a felled birch tree, gazing down the valley,
his cheeks resting on his hands.  Daphne, stealing behind a giant ilex,
studied him.  He wore something that looked like a golf suit of
brownish shade; a soft felt hat drooped over his face. The girl peered
out from her hiding place cautiously, holding her skirts together to
make herself slim and small.  It was a choice of evils.  On this side
of the hill was a man; on that, the whole wide world, pathless.  She
was hopelessly lost.

"No bad man could whistle like that," thought Daphne, caressingly
touching with her cheek the tree that protected her.

Once she ventured from her refuge, then swiftly retreated. Courage
returning, she stepped out on tiptoe and crept softly toward the
intruder.  She was rehearsing the Italian phrases she meant to use.

"Where is Rome?" she asked pleadingly, in the Roman tongue.

The stranger rose, with no sign of being startled, and removed his hat.
Then Daphne sighed a great sigh of relief, feeling that she was safe.

"Rome," he answered, in a voice both strong and sweet, "Rome has
perished, and Athens too."

"Oh"--said the girl.  "You speak English.  If you are not a stranger
here, perhaps you can tell me where the Villa Accolanti is."

"I can," he replied, preparing to lead the way.

Daphne looked at him now.  He was different from any person she had
ever seen.  Face and head belonged to some antique type of virile
beauty; eyes, hair, and skin seemed all of one golden brown. He walked
as if his very steps were joyous, and his whole personality seemed to
radiate an atmosphere of firm content.  The girl's face was puzzled as
she studied him.  This look of simple happiness was not familiar in New
York.

They strode on side by side, over the slopes where the girl had lost
her way.  Every moment added to her sense of trust.

"I am afraid I startled you," she said, "coming up so softly."

"No," he answered smiling.  "I knew that you were behind the ilex."

"You couldn't see!"

"I have ways of knowing."

He helped her courteously over the one stone wall they had to climb,
but, though she knew that he was watching her, he made no attempt to
talk.  At last they reached the ilex grove above the villa, and Daphne
recognized home.

"I am grateful to you," she said, wondering at this unwonted sense of
being embarrassed.  "Perhaps, if you will come some day to the villa
for my sister to thank you"-- The sentence broke off.  "I am Daphne
Willis," she said abruptly, and waited.

"And I am Apollo," said the stranger gravely.

"Apollo--what?" asked the girl.  Did they use the old names over here?

"Phoebus Apollo," he answered, unsmiling.  "Is America so modern that
you do not know the older gods?"

"Why do you call me an American?"

A smile flickered across Apollo's lips.

"A certain insight goes with being a god."

Daphne started back and looked at him, but the puzzled scrutiny did not
deepen the color of his brown cheek.  Suddenly she was aware that the
sunlight had faded, leaving shadow under the ilexes and about the
fountain on the hill.

"I must say good-night," she said, turning to descend.

He stood watching every motion that she made until she disappeared
within the yellow walls of the villa.



CHAPTER III

Through the great open windows of the room night with all her stars was
shining.  Daphne sat by a carved table in the salon, the clear light of
a four-flamed Roman lamp falling on her hair and hands.  She was
writing a letter, and, judging by her expression, letter writing was a
matter of life and death.

"I am afraid that I was brutal," the wet ink ran.  "Every day on the
sea told me that.  I was cowardly too."

She stopped to listen to the silence, broken only by the murmur of
insects calling to each other in the dark.  Suddenly she laughed aloud.

"I ought never to have gone so far away," she remarked to the night.
"What would Aunt Alice say?  Anyway he is a gentleman, even if he is a
god!"

"For I thought only of myself," the pen continued, "and ignored the
obligations I had accepted.  It is for you to choose whether you wish
the words of that afternoon unsaid."

The letter signed and sealed, she rose with a great sigh of relief, and
walked out upon the balcony.  Overhead was the deep blue sky of a Roman
night, broken by the splendor of the stars. She leaned over the stone
railing of the balcony, feeling beneath her, beyond the shadow of the
cypress trees, the distance and darkness of the Campagna.  There was a
murmur of water from the fountain in the garden, and from the cascades
on the hill.

"If he were Apollo," she announced to the listening stars, "it would
not be a bit more wonderful than the rest of it.  This is just a
different world, that is all, and who knows whom I shall meet next?
Maybe, if I haunt the hills, Diana will come and invite me to go
a-hunting.  Perhaps if Anna had stayed at home this world would seem
nearer."

She came back into the salon, but before she knew it, her feet were
moving to a half-remembered measure, and she found herself dancing
about the great room in the dim light, the cream-colored draperies of
her dinner gown moving rhythmically after her. Suddenly she stopped
short, realizing that her feet were keeping pace with the whistling of
this afternoon, the very notes that had terrified her while the
stranger was unseen.  She turned her attention to a piece of tapestry
on the wall, tracing the faded pattern with slim fingers.  For the
twentieth time her eyes wandered to the mosaic floor, to the splendid,
tarnished mirrors on the walls, to the carved chairs and table legs,
wrought into cunning patterns of leaf and stem.

"Oh, it is all perfect! and I've got it all to myself!" she exclaimed.

Then she seated herself at the table again and began another letter.



Padre mio,--It is an enchanted country!  You never saw such beauty of
sky and grass and trees.  These cypresses and poplars seem to have been
standing against the blue sky from all eternity; time is annihilated,
and the gods of Greece and Rome are wandering about the hills.

Anna has gone away.  Her father-in-law is very ill, and naturally Count
Accolanti is gone too.  Even the cook has departed, because of a family
crisis of his own.  I am here with the butler and his wife to take care
of me, and I am perfectly safe.  Don't be alarmed, and don't tell Aunt
Alice that the elaborate new gowns will have no spectators save two
Roman peasants and possibly a few sheep. Anna wanted to send me an
English maid from Rome, but I begged with tears, and she let me off.
Assunta is all I need. She and Giacomo are the real thing, peasants,
and absolutely unspoiled. They have never been five miles away from the
estate, and I know they have all kinds of superstitions and beliefs
that go with the soil.  I shall find them out when I can understand. At
present we converse with eyes and fingers, for our six weeks' study of
Italian has not brought me knowledge enough to order my dinner.

Padre carissimo, I've written to Eustace to take it all back.  I am
afraid you won't like it, for you seemed pleased when it was broken
off, but I was unkind and I am sorry, and I want to make amends.  You
really oughtn't to disapprove of a man, you know, just because he wants
altar candles and intones the service.  And I think his single-minded
devotion is beautiful.  You do not know what a refuge it has been to me
through all Aunt Alice's receptions and teas.

Do leave New York, and come and live with me near ancient Rome. We can
easily slip back two thousand years.

I am your spoiled daughter, Daphne


There was a knock at the door.

"Avanti," called the girl.

Assunta entered, with a saffron-colored night-cap on.  In her hand she
held Giacomo's great brass watch, and she pointed in silence to the
face, which said twelve o'clock.  She put watch and candle on the
table, marched to the windows, and closed and bolted them all.

"The candles are lighted in the Signorina's bedroom," she remarked.

"Thank you," said Daphne, who did not understand a word.

"The bed is prepared, and the night things are put out."

"Yes?" answered Daphne, smiling.

"The hot water will be at the door at eight in the morning."

"So many thanks!" murmured Daphne, not knowing what favor was bestowed,
but knowing that if it came from Assunta it was good.

"Good-night, Signorina."

The girl's face lighted.  She understood that.

"Good-night," she answered, in the Roman tongue.

Assunta muttered to herself as she lighted her way with her candle down
the long hall.

"Molto intelligente, la Signorina!  Only here three days, and already
understands all."

"You don't need speech here," said Daphne, pulling aside the curtains
of her tapestried bed a little later.  "The Italians can infer all you
mean from a single smile."

Down the road a peasant was merrily beating his donkey to the measure
of the tune on his lips.  Listening, and turning over many questions in
her mind, Daphne fell asleep.  A flood of sunshine awakened her in the
morning, and she realized that Assunta was drawing the window curtains.

"Assunta," asked the girl, sitting up in bed and rubbing her eyes, "are
there many Americans here?"

"Si," answered Assunta, "very many."

"And many English?"

"Too many," said Assunta.

"Young ones?" asked the girl.

Assunta shrugged her shoulders.

"Young men?" inquired Daphne.

The peasant woman looked sharply at her, then smiled.

"I saw one man yesterday," said Daphne, her forehead puckered painfully
in what Assunta mistook for a look of fear.  Her carefully prepared
phrases could get no nearer the problem she wished solved.

"Ma che!  agnellina mia, my little lamb!" cried the peasant woman,
grasping Daphne's hand in order to kiss her fingers, "you are safe,
safe with us.  No Americans nor English shall dare to look at the
Signorina in the presence of Giacomo and me."



CHAPTER IV

It was not a high wall, that is, not very high.  Many a time in the
country Daphne had climbed more formidable ones, and there was no
reason why she should not try this.  No one was in sight except a
shepherd, watching a great flock of sheep.  There was a forgotten rose
garden over in that field; had Caesar planted it, or Tiberius,
centuries ago?  Certainly no one had tended it for a thousand years or
two, and the late pink roses grew unchecked. Daphne slowly worked her
way to the top of the wall; this close masonry made the proceeding more
difficult than it usually was at home.  She stood for a moment on the
summit, glorying in the widened view, then sprang, with the lightness
of a kitten, to the other side.  There was a skurry of frightened
sheep, and then a silence.

She knew that she was sitting on the grass, and that her left wrist
pained.  Some one was coming toward her.

"Are you hurt?" asked Apollo anxiously.

"Not at all," she answered, continuing to sit on the grass.

"If you were hurt, where would it be?"

"In my wrist," said the girl, with a little groan.

The questioner kneeled beside her, and Daphne gave a start of surprise
that was touched with fear.

"It isn't you?" she stammered.  "You aren't the shepherd?"

A sheepskin coat disguised him.  The rough hat was of soft drooping
felt, like that of any shepherd watching on the hills, and in his hand
he held a crook.  An anxious mother-sheep was sniffing eagerly at his
pockets, remembering gifts of salt.

"Apollo was a shepherd," said Daphne slowly, with wonder in her face.
"He kept the flocks of King Admetus."

"You seem to be well read in the classical dictionary," remarked the
stranger, with twinkling eyes.  "You have them in America then?"

He was examining her wrist with practiced fingers, touching it firmly
here and there.

"We have everything in America," said the girl, eyeing him dubiously.

"But no gods except money, I have heard."

"Yes, gods, and impostors too," she answered significantly.

"So I have heard," said Apollo, with composure.

The maddening thing was that she could not look away from him--some
radiance of life in his face compelled her eyes.  He had thrown his hat
upon the grass, and the girl could see strength and sweetness and
repose in every line of forehead, lip, and chin. There was pride there,
too, and with it a slight leaning forward of the head.

"I presume that comes from listening to beseeching prayers," she was
thinking to herself.

"Ow!" she remarked suddenly.

"That is the place, is it?"

He drew from one of the pockets of the grotesque coat a piece of
sheepskin, which he proceeded to cut into two strips with his knife.

"It seems to be a very slight sprain," remarked Apollo.  "I must
bandage it.  Have you any pins about you?"

"Can the gods lack pins?" asked the girl, smiling.  She searched, and
found two in her belt, and handed them to him.

"The gods do not explain themselves," he answered, binding the
sheepskin tightly about her wrist.

"So I observe," she remarked dryly.

"Is that right?" he asked.  "Now, when you reach home, you must remove
the bandage and hold your hand and wrist first in very hot water, then
in cold.  Is there some one who can put the bandage back as I have it?
See, it simply goes about the wrist, and is rather tight.  You must
pardon my taking possession of the case, but no one else was near.
Apollo has always been something of a physician, you know."

"You apparently used the same classical dictionary that I did,"
retorted Daphne.  "I remember the statement there."

Then she became uncomfortable, and wished her words unsaid, for awe had
come upon her.  After all, nothing could be more unreal than she was to
herself in these days of wonder.  Her mind was full of dreams as they
sat and watched white clouds drifting over the deep blue of the sky.
Near them the sheep were cropping grass, and all the rest was silence.

"You look anxious," said the physician.  "Is it the wrist?"

"No," answered the girl, facing him bravely, under the momentary
inspiration of a wave of common sense, "I am wondering why you make
this ridiculous assumption about yourself.  Tell me who you really are."

If he had defended himself she would have argued, but he was silent and
she half believed.

"But you look like a mortal," she protested, answering her own
thoughts.  "And you wear conventional clothing.  I don't mean this
sheepskin, but the other day."

"It is a realistic age," he answered, smiling.  "People no longer
believe what they do not see.  We are forced to adopt modern methods
and modern costume to show that we exist."

"You do not look like the statue of Apollo," ventured Daphne.

"Did people ever dare tell the truth about the gods?  Never! They made
up a notion of what a divine nose should be and bestowed it upon all
the gods impartially.  So with the forehead, so with the hair.  I
assure you, Miss Willis, we are much more individual than Greek art
would lead you to expect."

"Do you mind just telling me why you are keeping sheep now?"

"I will, if you will promise not to consider a question of mine
impertinent."

"What is the question?"

"I only wished to know why an American young lady should bear a Greek
name?  It is a beautiful name, and one that is a favorite of mine as
you may know."

"I didn't know," said Daphne.  "It was given me by my father.  He was
born in America, but he had a Greek soul.  He has always longed to live
in Greece, but he has to go on preaching, preaching, for he is a
rector, you know, in a little church in New York, that isn't very rich,
though it is very old.  All his life he has been hungry for the beauty
and the greatness of the world over here."

"That accounts for your expression," observed Apollo.

"What expression?"

"That isn't the question I promised to answer.  If you will take a few
steps out of your way, I can satisfy you in regard to the first one you
asked."

He rose, and the white shepherd dog sprang ahead, barking joyously. The
sheep looked up and nibbled in anxious haste, fearing that any other
bit of pasture might be less juicy than this.  Daphne followed the
shepherd god to a little clump of oak trees, where she saw a small,
rough gray tent, perhaps four feet in height. Under it, on brown
blankets, lay a bearded man, whose eyes lighted at Apollo's approach.
A blue bowl with a silver spoon in it stood on the ground near his
head, and a small heap of charred sticks with an overhanging kettle
showed that cooking had been done there.

"The shepherd has a touch of fever," explained the guide. "Meanwhile,
somebody must take care of the sheep.  I am glad to get back my two
occupations as shepherd and physician at the same time."

The dog and his master accompanied her part way down the hill, and the
girl was silent, for her mind was busy, revolving many thoughts.  At
the top of the last height above the villa she stopped and looked at
her companion.  The sun was setting, and a golden haze filled the air.
It ringed with light the figure before her, standing there, the face,
with its beauty of color, and its almost insolent joyousness, rising
above the rough sheepskin coat.

"Who are you?" she gasped, terrified.  "Who are you, really?" The
confused splendor dazzled her eyes, and she turned and ran swiftly down
the hill.



CHAPTER V

"A man is ill," observed Daphne, in the Roman tongue.

"What?" demanded Giacomo.

"A man is ill," repeated Daphne firmly.  She had written it out, and
she knew that it was right.

"Her mind wanders," Giacomo hinted to his wife.

"No, no, no!  It's the Signorina herself," cried Assunta, whose wits
were quicker than her husband's.  "She is saying that she is ill.  What
is it, Signorina mia?  Is it your head, or your back, or your stomach?
Are you cold?  Have you fever?"

"Si," answered Daphne calmly.  The answer that usually quieted Assunta
failed now.  Then she tried the smile.  That also failed.

"Tell me," pleaded Assunta, speaking twice as fast as usual, in order
to move the Signorina's wits to quicker understanding. "If the
Signorina is ill the Contessa will blame me.  It is measles perhaps;
Sor Tessa's children have it in the village."  She felt of the girl's
forehead and pulse, and stood more puzzled than before.

"The Signorina exaggerates, perhaps?" she remarked in question.

"Thank you!" said Daphne beseechingly.

That was positively her last shot, and if it missed its aim she knew
not what to do.  She saw that the two brown faces before her were full
of apprehension, and she came back to her original proposition.

"A man is ill."

The faces were blank.  Daphne hastily consulted her phrase-book.

"I wish food," she remarked glibly.  "I wish soup, and fish, and red
wine and white, and everything included, tutto compreso."

The brown eyes lighted; these were more familiar terms.

"Now?" cried Assunta and Giacomo in one breath, "at ten o'clock in the
morning?"

"Si," answered Daphne firmly, "please, thank you."  And she disappeared.

An hour later they summoned her, and looked at her in bewilderment when
she entered the dining-room with her hat on. Giacomo stood ready for
service, and the Signorina's soup was waiting on the table.

The girl laughed when she saw it.

"Per me?  No," she said, touching her dress with her finger; "for him,
up there," and she pointed upward.

Giacomo shook his head and groaned, for his understanding was exhausted.

"I go to carry food to the man who is ill," recited Daphne, her foot
tapping the floor in impatience.  She thrust her phrase-book out toward
Giacomo, but he shook his head again, being one whose knowledge was
superior to the mere accomplishment of reading.

Daphne's short skirt and red felt hat disappeared in the kitchen.
Presently she returned with Assunta and a basket.  The two understood
her immediate purpose now, however bewildering the ultimate.  They
packed the basket with a right good will:  red wine in a transparent
flask, yellow soup in a shallow pitcher, bread, crisp lettuce, and thin
slices of beef.  Then Daphne gave the basket to Giacomo and beckoned
him to come after her.

He climbed behind his lady up the narrow path by the waterfalls through
damp grass and trickling fern, then up the great green slope toward the
clump of oak trees.  By the low gray tent they halted, and Giacomo's
expression changed.  He had not understood the Signorina, he said
hastily, and he begged the Signorina's pardon.  She was good, she was
gracious.

"Speak to him," said Daphne impatiently; "go in, give him food."

He lifted the loose covering that served as the side of a tent, and
found the sick man.  Giacomo chattered, his brown fingers moving
swiftly by way of punctuation.  The sick man chattered, too, his
fingers moving more slowly in their weakness.  Giacomo seemed excited
by what he heard, and Daphne, watching from a little distance, wondered
if fever must not increase under the influence of tongues that wagged
so fast.  She strolled away, picking tiny, pink-tipped daisies and blue
succory blossoms growing in the moist green grass.  From high on a
distant hillside, among his nibbling sheep, the shepherd watched.

Giacomo presently stopped talking and fed the invalid the soup and part
of the wine he had brought.  He knew too much, as a wise Italian, to
give a sick man bread and beef.  Then he made promises of blankets, and
of more soup to-morrow, tucked the invalid up again, and prepared to go
home.  On the way down the hill he was explosive in his excitement;
surely the Signorina must understand such vehement words.

"The sheep are Count Gianelli's sheep," he shouted.  "I knew the sheep
before, and there isn't a finer flock on the hills.  This man is from
Ortalo, a day's journey.  The Signorina understands?"

She smiled, the reassuring smile that covers ignorance.  Then she came
nearer, and bent her tall head to listen.

"His name is Antoli," said Giacomo, speaking more distinctly. "Four
days ago he fell ill with fever and with chills.  He lay on the ground
among the sheep, for he had only his blanket that the shepherds use at
night.  The sheep nibbled close to him, and touched his face with their
tongues, and bit off hairs from his head as they cropped the grass, but
they did not care.  Sheep never do!  Ah, how a dog cares!  The
Signorina wishes to hear the rest?"

Daphne nodded eagerly, for she had actually understood several
sentences.

"The second day he felt a warm tongue licking his face, and there were
paws on his breast as he waked from sleep.  It was a white dog.  He
opened his eyes, and there before him was a Signorino, young, beautiful
as a god, in a suit of brown.  Since then Antoli has wanted nothing,
food, nor warm covering, nor medicine, nor kind words.  The Signorino
wears his sheepskin coat and tends his sheep!"

Giacomo's voice was triumphant with delight as he pointed toward the
distant flock with the motionless attendant.  The girl's face shone,
half in pleasure, half in fear.  "Beautiful as a god" was more like the
Italian she had read in her father's study in New York than were the
phrases Giacomo and Assunta employed for every day.  She had
comprehended all of her companion's excitement, and many of his words,
for much of the story was already hers.

"Giacomo," she said, speaking slowly, "are the gods here yet?"

The old peasant looked at her with cunning eyes, and made with his
fingers the sign of the horn that wards off evil.

"Chi lo sa?  Who knows, Signorina?" he said, half whispering. "There
are stories--I have heard--the Signorina sees these ilex trees?  Over
yonder was a great one in my father's day, and the old Count Accolanti
would have it cut.  He came to watch it as it fell, and the tree
tumbled the wrong way and struck him so that he half lost his wits.
There are who say that the tree god was angry. And I have heard about
the streams, too, Signorina; when they are turned out of their course,
they overflow and do damage, and surely there used to be river gods.  I
do not know; I cannot tell. The priest says they are all gone since the
coming of our Lord, but I wouldn't, not for all the gold in Rome, I
wouldn't see this stream of the waterfalls turned away from flowing
down the hill and through the house.  What there is in it I do not
know, but in some way it is alive."

"Thank you!" said Daphne.  The look on her face pleased the old man.

"I think I prefer her to the Contessa after all," said Giacomo that
afternoon to Assunta as he was beating the salad dressing for dinner.

"She is simpatica!  It is wonderful how she understands, though she
cannot yet talk much.  But her eyes speak."

They served her dinner with special care that night, for kindness to an
unfortunate fellow peasant had won what still needed winning of their
hearts.  She sat alone in the great dining-hall, with Giacomo moving
swiftly about her on the marble floor.  On the white linen and silver,
on her face and crimson gown, gleamed the light of many candles,
standing in old-fashioned branching candlesticks.  She pushed away her
soup; it seemed an intrusion. Not until she heard Giacomo's murmur of
disappointment as she refused salad did she rouse herself to do justice
to the dressing he had made.  Her eyes were the eyes of one living in a
dream. Suddenly she wakened to the fact that she was hungry, and
Giacomo grinned as she asked him to bring back the roast, and let him
fill again with cool red wine the slender glass at her right hand. When
the time for dessert came, she lifted a bunch of purple grapes and put
them on her plate, breaking them off slowly with fingers that got
stained.

"I shall wake up by and by!" she said, leaning back in her carved
Florentine chair.  "Only I hope it may be soon.  Otherwise," she added,
nibbling a bit of ginger, unconscious that her figures were mixed, "I
shall forget my way back to the world."



CHAPTER VI

There were two weeks of golden days.  The sun rose clear over the green
hills behind the villa, and dropped at night into the blue sea the
other side of Rome.  Daphne counted off the minutes in pulse beats that
were actual pleasure.  Between box hedges, past the clusters of roses,
chrysanthemums, and dahlias in the villa garden, she walked, wondering
that she had never known before that the mere crawling of the blood
through the veins could mean joy.  She was utterly alone, solitary,
speechless; there were moments when the thought of her sister's present
trouble, and of the letter she was expecting from New York, would take
the color from the sky; but no vexatious thought could long resist the
enchantment of this air, and she forgot to be unhappy.  She saw no more
of the shepherd god, but always she was conscious of a presence in the
sunshine on the hills.

On the eighth morning, as she paced the garden walks, a lizard
scampered from her path, and she chased it as a five year old child
might have done.  A slim cypress tree stood in her way; she grasped it
in her arms, and held it, laying her cheek against it as if it were a
friend.  Some new sense was dawning in her of kinship with branch and
flower.  She was forgetting how to think; she was Daphne, the Greek
maiden, whose life was half the life of a tree.

When she took her arms from the tree she saw that he was there, looking
at her from over the hedge, with the golden brown lights in eyes and
hair, and the smile that had no touch of amusement in it, only of
happiness.

"Sometimes," he murmured, "you remind me of Hebe, but on the whole, I
think you are more like my sister Diana."

"Tell me about Diana," begged Daphne, coming near the hedge and putting
one hand on the close green leaves.

"We were great friends as children," observed Apollo.  "It was I who
taught her how to hunt, and we used to chase each other in the woods.
When I went faster then she did, she used to get angry and say she
would not play.  Oh, those were glorious mornings, when the light was
clear at dawn!"

"Why are you here?" asked Daphne abruptly, "and, if you will excuse me,
where did you come from?"

"Surely you have heard about the gods being exiled from Greece! We
wander, for the world has cast us out.  Some day they will need us
again, and will pluck the grass from our shrines, and then we shall
come back to teach them."

"Teach them what?" asked the girl.  She could make out nothing from the
mystery of that face, and besides, she did not dare to look too closely.

"I should teach them joy," he answered simply.

They were so silent, looking at each other over the dark green hedge,
that the lizards crept back in the sunshine close to their feet.
Daphne's blue gown and smooth dark hair were outlined against the deep
green of her cypress tree.  A grapevine that had grown about the tree
threw the shadow of delicate leaf and curling tendril on her pale cheek
and scarlet lips.  The expression of the heathen god as he looked at
her denoted entire satisfaction.

"I know what you would teach them," she said slowly.  "You would show
them how to ignore suffering and pain.  You would turn your back on
need.  Oh, that makes me think that I have forgotten to take your
friend Antoli any soup lately!  For three days I took it, and then, and
then--I have been worried about things."

His smile was certainly one of amusement now.

"You must pardon me for seeming to change the subject," he said. "Why
should you worry?  There is nothing in life worth worrying about."

Fine scorn crept into the girl's face.

"No," he continued, answering her expression.  "I don't ignore. I am
glad because I have chosen to be glad, and because I have won my
content.  There is a strenuous peace for those who can fight their way
through to it."

Suddenly, through the beauty of his color, the girl saw, graven as with
a fine tool upon his face, a story of grief mastered.  In the lines of
chin and mouth and forehead it lurked there, half hidden by his smile.

"Tell me," said Daphne impulsively.  Her hand moved nearer on the
hedge, but she did not know it.  He shook his head, and the veil
dropped again.

"Why tell?" he asked.  "Isn't there present misery enough before our
eyes always, without remembering the old?"

She only gazed at him, with a puzzled frown on her forehead.

"So you think it is your duty to worry?" he asked, the joyous note
coming back into his voice.

Daphne broke into a smile.

"I suppose I do," she confessed.  "And it's so hard here.  I keep
forgetting."

"Why do you want to remember?"

"It is so selfish not to."

He nodded, with an air of ancient wisdom.

"I have lived on this earth more years than you have, some thousands,
you remember, and I can assure you that more people forget their
fellows because of their own troubles than because of their own joys."

The girl pulled at a tendril of the vine with her fingers, eyeing her
companion keenly.

"I presume," she said, with a tremor in her voice, "that you are an
Englishman, or an American who has studied Greek thought deeply, being
tired of modern people and modern ways, and that you are trying to get
back to an older, simpler way of living."

"It has ever been the custom," said Apollo, gently taking the tendril
of the vine from her fingers, "for a nation to refuse to believe the
divinity of the others' gods."

"Anyway," mused the girl, not quite conscious that she was speaking
aloud, "whatever you think, you are good to the shepherd."

He laughed outright.

"I find that most people are better than their beliefs," he answered.
"Now, Miss Willis, I wonder if I dare ask you questions about the way
of living that has brought you to believe in the divine efficacy of
unhappiness."

"My father is a clergyman," answered the girl, with a smile.

"Exactly!" said the heathen god.

"We have lived very quietly, in one of the streets of older New York.
I won't tell you the number, for of course it would not mean anything
to you."

"Of course not," said Apollo.

"He is rector of a queer little old-fashioned church that has existed
since the days of Washington.  It is quaint and irregular, and I am
very fond of it."

"It isn't the Little Church of All the Saints?" demanded her companion.

"It is.  How did you know?"

"Divination," he answered.

"Oh!" said Daphne.  "Why don't you divine the rest?"

"I should rather hear you tell it, if you don't mind."

"I have studied with my father a great deal," she went on.  "And then,
there have been a great many social things, for I have an aunt who
entertains a great deal, and she always needs me to help her.  That has
been fun, too."

"Then it has been religion and dinners," he summarized briefly.

"It has."

"With a Puritan ancestry, I suppose?"

"For a god," murmured Daphne, "it seems to me you know a great deal too
much about some things, and not enough about others."

"I have brought you something," he said, suddenly changing the subject.

He lifted the sheepskin coat and held out to her a tiny lamb, whose
heavy legs hung helpless, and whose skin shone pink through the little
curls of wool.  The girl stretched out her arms and gathered the little
creature in them.

"A warm place to lie, and warm milk are what it needs," he said. "It
was born out of its time, and its mother lies dead on the hills. Spring
is for birth, not autumn."

Daphne watched him as he went back to his sheep, then turned toward the
house.  Giacomo and Assunta saw her coming in her blue dress between
the beds of flowers with the lambkin in her arms.

"Like our Lady!" said Assunta, hurrying to the rescue.

The two brown ones asked no questions, possibly because of the
difficulty of conversing with the Signorina, possibly from some
profounder reason.

"Maybe the others do not see him," thought the girl in perplexity.
"Maybe I dream him, but this lamb is real."

She sat in the sun on the marble steps of the villa, the lamb on her
lap.  A yellow bowl of milk stood on the floor, close to the little
white head that dangled from her blue knee.  Daphne, acting on
Assunta's directions, curled one little finger under the milk and
offered the tip of it to the lamb to suck.  He responded eagerly, and
so she wheedled him into forgetfulness of his dead mother.

An hour later, as she paced the garden paths, a faint bleat sounded at
the hem of her skirt, and four unsteady legs supported a weak little
body that tumbled in pursuit of her.



CHAPTER VII

Up the long smooth road that lay by the walls of the villa came toiling
a team of huge grayish oxen, with monstrous spreading horns tied with
blue ribbons.  The cart that they drew was filled with baskets loaded
with grapes, and a whiff of their fragrance smote Daphne's nostrils as
she walked on the balcony in the morning air.

"Assunta, Assunta!" she cried, leaning over the gray, moss-coated
railing, "what is it?"

Assunta was squatting on the ground in the garden below, digging with a
blunt knife at the roots of a garden fern.  There was a gray red cotton
shawl over her head, and a lilac apron upon her knees.

"It's the vintage, Signorina," she answered, "the wine makes itself."

"Everything does itself in this most lazy country," remarked Daphne.
"Dresses make themselves, boots repair themselves, food eats itself.
There's just one idiom, si fa,"--

"What?" asked Assunta.

"Reflections," answered the girl, smiling down on her.  "Assunta, may I
go and help pick grapes?"

"Ma che!" screamed the peasant woman, losing her balance in her sudden
emotion and going down on her knees in the loosened soil.

"The Signorina, the sister of the Contessa, go to pick grapes in the
vineyard?"

"Si'" answered Daphne amiably.  Her face was alive with laughter.

"But the Contessa would die of shame!" asserted Assunta, rising with
bits of dirt clinging to her apron, and gesticulating with the knife.
"It would be a scandal, and all the pickers would say, 'Behold the mad
English-Woman!'"

She looked up beseechingly at her mistress.  She and Giacomo never
could tell beforehand which sentences the Signorina was going to
understand.

"Come with me!" coaxed the girl.

"But does the Signorina want to"--

"I want everything!" Daphne interrupted.  "Grapes and flowers and wine
and air and sunshine.  I want to see and feel and taste and touch and
smell everything there is.  The days are too short to take it all in.
Hurry!"

As most of this outburst was in English, Assunta could do nothing but
look up with an air of deepened reproach.  Daphne disappeared from the
railing, and a minute later was at Assunta's side.

"Come, come, come!" she cried, pulling her by the lilac apron. "Our
time is brief, and we must gather rosebuds while we may. I am young and
you are old, and neither of us has any time to lose."

Before she knew it, Assunta was trotting meekly down the road at the
young lady's heels, carrying a great flat basket for the Signorina's
use in picking grapes.

They were bound for the lower slopes; the grapes ripened earlier there,
the peasant woman explained, and the frosts came later. The loaded
wagons that they met were going to Arata, a wine press in the valley
beyond this nearest hill.  Perhaps the Signorina would like to go there
to see the new wine foaming in the vat? Strangers often went to see
this.

Daphne's blood went singing through her veins with some new sense of
freedom and release, for the gospel of this heathen god was working in
her pulses.  Wistfully her eyes wandered over the lovely slopes with
their clothing of olive and of vine, and up and down the curling long
white roads.  At some turning of the way, or at some hilltop where the
road seemed to touch the blue sky, surely she would see him coming with
that look of divine content upon his face!

Suddenly she realized that they were inside the vineyard walls, for
fragrance assailed her nostrils, fragrance of ripened grapes, of grapes
crushed under foot as the swift pickers went snipping the full purple
bunches with their shears.

"I shall see Bacchus coming next," she said to herself, but hoping that
it would not be Bacchus.  "He will go singing down the hill with the
Maenads behind him, with fluttering hair and draperies."

It was not nearly so picturesque as she had hoped, she confessed to
herself, as her thoughts came down to their customary level. The
vineyard of her dreams, with its long, trailing vines, was not found in
this country; there were only close-clipped plants trained to stakes.
But there was a sound of talking and of laughter, and the pickers,
moving among the even lines in their gay rags, lent motley color to the
picture.  There was scarlet of waistcoat or of petticoat, blue and
saffron of jacket and apron, and a blending of all bright tints in the
kerchiefs above the hair. The rich dark soil made a background for it
all:  the moving figures, the clumps of pale green vine leaves, the
great baskets of piled-up grapes.

Assunta was chattering eagerly with a young man who smiled, and took
off his hat to the Signorina, and said something polite, with a show of
white teeth.  Daphne did not know what it was, but she took the pair of
scissors that were given her, and began to cut bunch after bunch of
grapes.  If she had realized that the peasant woman, her heart full of
shame, had confessed to the overseer her young lady's whim, and had won
permission for her to join the ranks of the pickers, she might have
been less happy. As it was, she noticed nothing, but diligently cut her
grapes, piling them, misty with bloom, flecked with gold sunlights, in
her basket.  Then she found a flat stone and sat on it, watching the
workers and slowly eating a great bunch of grapes.  She had woven green
leaves into the cord of her red felt hat; the peasants as they passed
smiled back to her in swift recognition of her friendliness and charm.

Her thoughts flamed up within her with sudden anger at herself. This
vivid joy in the encompassing beauty had but one meaning: it was her
sense of the glad presence of this new creature, man or god, who seemed
continually with her, were he near or far.

"I'm as foolish as a sixteen-year-old girl," she murmured, fingering
the grapes in the basket with their setting of green leaves, "and yet,
and yet he isn't a man, really; he is only a state of mind!"

She sat, with the cool air of autumn on her cheeks, watching the
pickers, who went with even motion up the great slope. Sometimes there
was silence on the hillside; now and then there was a fragment of song.
One gay, tripping air, started by three women who stood idle with arms
akimbo for a moment on the hillside, was caught up and echoed back by
invisible singers on the other side of the hill.  And once the
red-cheeked Italian lads who were carrying loaded baskets down toward
the vineyard gates burst into responsive singing that made her think
that she had found, on the Roman hills, some remnant of the old Bacchic
music, of the alternate strains that marked the festival of the god of
wine. It was something like this:--

Carlo.

  "Of all the gifts of all the gods
  I choose the ruddy wine.
  The brimming glass shall be my lot"--

Giovanni (interrupting).

  "Carlotta shall be mine!
  Take you the grape, I only ask
  The shadow of the vine
  To screen Carlotta's golden head"--

Carlo (interrupting).

  "Give me the ruddy wine."

Together.

  G.  "Carlotta shall be mine!"
  C.  "Give me the ruddy wine!"


Assunta was visibly happy when the Signorina signified her willingness
to go home.  The pride of the house servant was touched by being
compelled to come too closely in contact with the workers in the
fields, and where is there pride like that of a peasant?  But her joy
was short-lived.  Outside the great iron gates stood a team of
beautiful fawn-colored oxen, with spotless flanks, and great, blue,
patient eyes looking out from under broad foreheads.  They were
starting, with huge muscles quivering under their white skin, to carry
a load of grapes to the wine press, the yield of this year being too
great for the usual transportation on donkey back.

"Assunta, I go too," cried Daphne.

Five minutes later the Signorina, with her unwilling handmaid at her
side, rode in triumph up the broad highway with the measured motion of
slow oxen feet.  Place had been made for them among the grape baskets,
and they sat on folded blankets, Assunta's face wearing the expression
of one who was a captive indeed, the Signorina's shining with simple
happiness and somewhat stained by grapes.

The wine press was nothing after all but a machine, and though a
certain interest attached to the great vats, hollowed out in the tufa
rock, into which the new-made wine trickled, Daphne soon signified her
willingness to depart.  Before she left they brought her a great glass
of rich red grape juice fresh from the newly crushed grapes.  She
touched her lips to it, then looked about her.  Assunta was talking to
the workman who had given it to her, and he was looking the other way.
She feasted her eyes on the color of the thing she held in her hand.
It was a rough glass whose shallow bowl had the old Etruscan curves of
beauty, and the crimson wine caught the sunlight in a thousand ways.
Bending over, she poured it out slowly on the green grass.

"A libation to Apollo," she said, not without reverence.



CHAPTER VIII

"I shall call you," said Daphne to the lamb on the fourth day of his
life with her, "I shall call you Hermes, because you go so fast."

Very fast indeed he went.  By garden path, or on the slopes below the
villa, he followed her with swift gallop, interrupted by many jumps and
gambols, and much frisking of his tail.  If he lost himself in his
wayward pursuit of his mistress, a plaintive bleat summoned her to his
side.  On the marble stairs of the villa, even in the sacred precincts
of the salon, she heard the tinkle of his hard little hoofs, and she
had no courage to turn him back.  He bleated so piteously outside the
door when his lady dined that at last he won the desire of his heart
and lapped milk from a bowl on the floor at her side as she ate her
salad or broke her grapes.

"What scandal!" muttered Giacomo every time he brought the bowl. The
Contessa would discharge him if she knew!  But he always remembered,
even if Daphne forgot, and meekly dried the milk from his sleek black
trousers whenever Hermes playfully dashed his hoof, instead of his
nose, into the bowl.  As Giacomo explained to Assunta in the kitchen,
it was for the Signorina, and the Signorina was very lonely.

She was less lonely with Hermes, for he spoke her language.

"It is almost time to hear from Eustace," Daphne told him one day, as
she sat on a stone under an olive tree in the orchard below the house.
Hermes stood before her, his head down, his tail dejectedly drooped.

"Perhaps," she added, dreamily looking up at the blue sky through its
broken veil of gray-green olive leaves, "perhaps he does not want me
back, and the letter will tell me so."

Hermes gave an incredible jump high in the air, lighted on his four
feet, pranced, gamboled, curveted.

"It is very hard to know one's duty or to do it, Hermes," said Daphne,
patting his woolly brow.  Hermes intimated, by means of frisking legs
and tail, that he would not try.

"I believe you are bewitched," said the girl, suddenly taking him up in
her arms.  "I believe you are some little changeling god sent by your
master Apollo to put his thoughts into my head."

He squirmed, and she put him down.  Then she gave him a harmless slap
on his fleecy side.

"But you aren't a good interpreter, Hermes.  Some way I think that his
joyousness lies the other side of pain.  He never ran away from hard
things."

This was more than the lambkin could understand or bear, and he fled,
hiding from her in the tall fern of a thicket in a corner of the field.

The days were drifting by too fast.  Already the Contessa Accolanti had
been away three weeks, and her letters held out no hope of an immediate
return.  Giacomo and Assunta were very sorry for their young mistress,
not knowing how little she was sorry for herself, and they tried to
entertain her.  They had none of the hard exclusiveness of English
servants, but admitted her generously to such of their family joys as
she would share. Giacomo introduced her to the stables and the horses;
Assunta initiated her into some of the mysteries of Italian cooking.
Tommaso, the scullion, and Pia, the maid, stood by in grinning delight
one day when the Contessa's sister learned to make macaroni.

"Now I know," said Daphne, after she had stood for half an hour under
the smoke-browned walls of the kitchen watching Assunta's manipulation
of eggs and flour, the long kneading, the rolling out of a thin layer
of dough, with the final cutting into thin strips; "to make Sunday and
festal-day macaroni you take all the eggs there are, and mix them up
with flour, and do all that to it; and then you boil it on the stove,
and make a sauce for it out of everything there is in the house, bits
of tomato, and parsley, and onion, and all kinds of meat.  E vero?"

"Si," said Assunta, marveling at the patois that the Signorina spoke,
and wondering if it contained Indian words.

The very sight of the rows of utensils on the kitchen walls deepened
the rebellious mood of this descendant of the Puritans.

"Even the pots and pans have lovely shapes," said Daphne wistfully, for
the slender necks, the winning curves, the lines of shallow bowl and
basin bore testimony to the fact that the meanest thought of this
people was a thought of beauty.  "I wonder why the Lord gave to them
the curve, to us the angle?"

When the macaroni was finished, Assunta invited the Signorina to go
with her to a little house set by itself on the sloping hill back of
the kitchen.

"E carin', eh?" demanded Assunta, as she opened the door.

Fragrance met them at the threshold, fragrance of fruit and of honey.
The warm sun poured in through the dirty, cobwebbed window when Assunta
lifted the shade.  Ranged on shelves along the wall stood bottles of
yellow oil; partly buried in the ground were numerous jars of wine,
bottles and jars both keeping the beautiful Etruscan curves.  On
shallow racks were spread bunches of yellow and of purple grapes, and
golden combs of honey gleamed from dusky corners.

"Ecco!" said Assunta, pointing to the wine jar from which she had been
filling the bottle in her hand.  "The holy cross!  Does the Signorina
see it?"

"Si," said Daphne.

"And here also?" asked Assunta, pointing to another.

The girl nodded doubtfully.  Two irregular scratches could, by
imaginative vision, be translated into a cross.

"As on every one, Signorina," said Assunta triumphantly.  "And nobody
puts it there.  It comes by itself."

"Really?" asked the girl.

"Veramente," replied the peasant woman.  "It has to, and not only here,
but everywhere.  You see, years and years ago, there were heathen
spirits in the wine, and they made trouble when our Lord came.  I have
heard that the jars burst and the wine was wasted because the god of
the wine was angry that the real God was born. And it lasted till San
Pietro came and exorcised the wicked spirit, and he put a cross on a
wine jar to keep him away.  Since then every wine jar bears somewhere
the sign of the cross."

"What became of the poor god?" asked Daphne.

"He fled, I suppose to hell," answered Assunta piously.

"Poor heathen gods!" murmured Daphne.

The sunshine, flooding the little room, fell full on her face, and made
red lights in her brown hair.

"There was a god of the sun, too, named Apollo," she said, warming her
hands in level rays.  "Was he banished too?"

Assunta shrugged her shoulders.

"Who knows?  They dare not show their faces here since the Holy Father
has blessed the land."

Hermes bleated at the door, and the trio descended the hill together,
Assunta carrying a basket of grapes and a bottle of yellow oil, Daphne
with a slender flask of red wine in her hand.

The next day the heavens opened, and rain poured down.  The cascades
above the villa became spouting waterfalls; the narrow path beside them
a leaping brook.  The rain had not the steady and persistent motion of
well-conducted rain; it came in sheets, blown by sudden gusts against
the windows, or driven in wild spurts among the cypresses.  The world
from the villa windows seemed one blur of watery green, with a thin
gray veil of mist to hide it.

Daphne paced the mosaic floors in idleness, or spelled out the meaning
of Petrarchan sonnets in an old vellum copy she had found in the
library.  Sometimes she sat brooding in one of the faded gilt and
crimson chairs in the salon, by the diminutive fireplace where two or
three tiny twigs burned out their lives in an Italian thought of heat.

What did a Greek god do when sunshine disappeared? she wondered. Or had
the god of the sun gone away altogether, and was this deluge the
result?  The shepherd Antoli had been taken home, Giacomo assured her,
but he was exceedingly reticent when asked who was herding the sheep,
only shrugging his shoulders with a "Chi lo sa?"

On the second day of the rain Daphne saw that the flock had come near
the house.  From the dining-room window she could see the sheep, with
water soaking into their thick wool.  Some one was guarding them.  With
little streams dashing from the drooping felt hat to the sheepskin clad
shoulders, the keeper stood, motionless in the pelting rain.  The sheep
ate greedily the wet, juicy grass, while the shepherd leaned on his
staff and watched. Undoubtedly it was Antoli's peasant successor,
Daphne thought, as she stood with her face to the dripping window pane.
Then the shepherd turned, and she recognized, under the wet hat brim,
the glowing color and undaunted smile of her masquerading god. Whether
he saw her or not she could not tell, but she stood by the storm-washed
window in her scarlet house gown and watched, longing to give him
shelter.



CHAPTER IX

He came to her next through music, when the rain clouds had broken
away.  That divine whistle, mellow, mocking, irresistible, still was
heard when morning lay on the hills.  Often, when afternoon had touched
all the air to gold, when the shadows of chestnut and cypress and
gnarled olive lay long on the grass, other sounds floated down to
Daphne, music from some instrument that she did not know.  It was no
harp, surely, yet certain clear, ranging notes seemed to come from the
sweeping of harp strings; again, it had all the subtle, penetrating
melody of the violin.  Whatever instrument gave it forth, it drew the
girl's heart after it to wander its own way.  When it was gay it won
her feet to some dance measure, and all alone in the great empty rooms
she would move to it with head thrown back and her whole body swaying
in a new sense of rhythm.  When it was sad, it set her heart to beating
in great throbs, for then it begged and pleaded.  There was need in it,
a human cry that surely was not the voice of a god. It spoke out of a
great yearning that answered to her own.  Whether it was swift or slow
she loved it, and waited for it day by day, thinking of Apollo and his
harping to the muses nine.

So her old life and her old mood slipped away like a garment no longer
needed:  her days were set to melody, and her nights to pleasant
dreams.  The jangle of street cars and the twinges of conscience, the
noises of her native city, and her heart searchings in the Little
Church of All the Saints faded to the remoteness of a faint gray bar of
cloud that makes the sunset brighter in the west.  She went singing
among the olives or past the fountain under the ilexes on the hill:
duties and perplexities vanished in the clear sunshine and pleasant
shadow of this golden world.

And all this meant that she had forgotten about the mails.  She had
ceased to long for letters containing good news, or to fear that one
full of bad tidings would come, and every one knows that such a state
of mind as this is serious.  Now, when Assunta found her one morning,
pacing the long, frescoed hall, by the side of the running water, and
put a whole sheaf of letters into her hand, Daphne looked at them
cautiously, and started to open one, then lost her courage and held
them for a while to get used to them. Finally she went upstairs and
changed her dress, putting on her short skirt and red felt hat, and
walked out into the highway with Hermes skipping after her.  She walked
rapidly up the even way, under the high stone walls green with
overhanging ivy and wistaria vines, and the lamb kept pace with her
with his gay gallop, broken now and then by a sidelong leap of sheer
joy up into the air. Presently she found a turning that she had not
known before, marked by a little wayside shrine, and taking it,
followed a narrow grass-grown road that curled about the side of a hill.

She read her father's letter first, walking slowly and smiling. If he
were only here to share this wide beauty!  Then she read her sister's,
which was full of woeful exclamations and bad news. The sick man was
slowly dying, and they could not leave him. Meanwhile she was desolated
by thinking of her little sister.  Of course she was safe, for Giacomo
and Assunta were more trustworthy than the Italian government, but it
must be very stupid, and she had meant to give Daphne such a gay time
at the villa.  She would write at once to some English friends at Lake
Scala, ten miles away, to see if they could not do something to relieve
her sister's solitude.

"To relieve my solitude!" gasped Daphne.  "Oh I am so afraid something
will!"

There were several other letters, all from friends at home.  One, in a
great square envelope, addressed with an English scrawl, she dreaded,
and she kept it for the last.  When she did tear it open her face grew
quite pale.  There was much in it about duty and consecration, and much
concerning two lives sacrificed to the same great ideal.  It breathed
thoughts of denial and of annihilation of self, and,--yes, Eustace took
her at her word and was ready to welcome again the old relation.  If
she would permit him, he would send back the ring.

Hermes hid behind a stone and dashed out at his mistress to surprise
her, expecting to be chased as usual, but Daphne could not run. With
heavy feet and downcast eyes she walked along the green roadway, then,
when her knees suddenly became weak, sat down on a stone and covered
her face with her hands.  She had not known until this moment how she
had been hoping that two and two would not make four; she had not
really believed that this could be the result of her letter of
atonement.  Her soul had traveled far since she wrote that letter, and
it was hard to find the way back. Hiding the brown and purple distances
of the Campagna came pictures of dim, candle-lighted spaces, of a thin
face with a setting of black and white priestly garments, and in her
ears was the sound of a voice endlessly intoning.  It made up a vision
of the impossible.

She sat there a long, long time, and when she wakened to a
consciousness of where she was, it was a whining voice that roused her.

"Signorina, for the love of heaven, give me a few soldi, for I am
starving."

Daphne looked up and was startled, and yet old beggar women were common
enough sights here among the hills.  This one had an evil look, with
her cunning, half-shut eyes.

The girl shook her head.

"I have no money with me," she remarked.

"But Signorina, so young, so beautiful, surely she has money with her."
A dirty brown hand came all too close to Daphne's face, and she sprang
to her feet.

"I have spoken," she said severely, giving a little stamp. "I have
none.  Now go away."

The whining continued, unintermittent.  The old woman came closer, and
her hand touched the girl's skirt.  Wrenching herself away, Daphne
found herself in the grasp of two skinny arms, and an actual physical
struggle began.  The girl had no time for fear, and suddenly help came.
A firm hand caught the woman's shoulder, and the victim was free.

"Are you hurt?" asked Apollo anxiously.

She shook her head, smiling.

"Frightened?"

"No.  Don't you always rescue me?"

"But this is merest accident, my being here.  It really isn't safe for
you alone on these roads."

"I knew you were near."

"And yet, I have just this minute come round the hill.  You could not
possibly have seen me."

"I have ways of knowing," said Daphne, smiling demurely.

A faint little bleat interrupted them.

"Oh, oh!" cried the girl, "she is running away with Hermes!"

Never did Apollo move more swiftly than he did then!  Daphne followed,
with flying feet.  He reached the beggar woman, held her, took the lamb
with one hand from her and handed it to Daphne. There followed a scene
which the girl remembered afterward with a curious sense of misgiving
and of question.  The thief gave one glance at the beautiful, angry
face of the man, then fell at his feet, groveling and beseeching.  What
she was saying the girl did not know, but her face and figure bore a
look of more than mortal fear.

"What does she think him?" murmured the girl.  Then she turned away
with him, and, with the lamb at their heels, they walked together back
along the grassy road.

"You look very serious," remarked her protector.  "You are sure it is
not fright?"

She shook her head, holding up her bundle of letters.

"Bad news?"

"No, good," she answered, smiling bravely.

"I hope good news will be infrequent," he answered.  "You look like
Iphigenia going to be sacrificed."

"I will admit that there is a problem," said the girl.  "There's a
question about my doing something."

"And you know it must be right to do it because you hate it?" he asked.

She nodded.

"Don't you think so, too? Now when you answer," she added triumphantly,
"I shall know what kind of god you are."

They had reached the turning of the ways, and he stopped, as if
intending to leave her.  "I cannot help you," he said sadly, "for I do
not know the case.  Only, I think it is best not to decide by any
abstruse rule.  Life is life's best teacher, and out of one's last
experience comes insight for the next.  But don't be too sure that duty
and unhappiness are one."

She left him, standing by the little wayside shrine with a strange look
on his face.  A tortured Christ hung there, casting the shadow of pain
upon the passers-by.  The expression in the brown eyes of the heathen
god haunted her all the way down the hill, and throughout the day:
they seemed to understand, and yet be glad.



CHAPTER X

It was nine o'clock as the Signorina descended the stairs. Through the
open doorway morning met her, crisp and cool, with sunshine touching
grass and green branch, still wet with dew. The very footfalls of the
girl on the shallow marble steps were eager and expectant, and her face
was gayer than those of the nymphs in the frescoes on the wall.  At the
bottom of the stairs, Giacomo met her, his face wreathed in smiles.

"Bertuccio has returned," he announced.

"Si, si, Signorina," came the voice of Assunta, who was pushing her way
through the dining-room door behind Giacomo.  She had on her magenta
Sunday shawl, and the color of her wrinkled cheeks almost matched it.

"What is Bertuccio?" asked the girl.  "A kitten?"

"A kitten!" gasped Assunta.

"Corpo di Bacco!" swore Giacomo.

Then the two brown ones devoted mind and body to explanation. Giacomo
gesticulated and waved the napkin he had in his hand; Assunta shook her
black silk apron:  and they both spoke at once.

"Il mio Bertuccio!  It is my little son, Signorina, and my only, and
the Signorina has never seen his like.  When he was three years old he
wore clothing for five years, and now he is six inches taller than his
father."

This and much more said Assunta, and she said it as one word. Giacomo,
keeping pace and giving syllable for syllable, remarked:--

"It is our Bertuccio who has been working in a tunnel in the Italian
Alps, and has come home for rest.  He is engineer, Signorina, and has
genius.  And before he became this he was guide here in the mountains,
and he knows every path, every stone, every tree."

"What?" asked Daphne feebly.

Then, in a multitude of words that darkened knowledge, they said it all
over again.  Bertuccio, the light of their eyes, the sole hope of their
old age, had come home.  He could be the Signorina's guide among the
hills, being very strong, very trusty, molto forte, molto fedele.

"Oh, I know!" cried the Signorina, with a sudden light in her face.
"Bertuccio is your son!"

"Si, si, si, Signorina!" exclaimed Giacomo and Assunta together,
ushering her into the dining-room.

"It is the blessed saints who have managed it," added Assunta devoutly.
"A wreath of flowers from Rome, all gauze and spangles, will I lay at
the shrine of our Lady, and there shall be a long red ribbon to say my
thanks in letters of gold."

The hope of the house was presented to the Signorina after breakfast.
He was a broad-shouldered, round-headed offshoot of Italian soil, with
honest brown eyes like those of both father and mother.  It was a face
to be trusted, Daphne knew, and when, recovering from the embarrassment
caused by his parents' pride in him, he blurted out the fact that he
had already been to the village that morning to find a little donkey
for the Signorina's wider journeyings, the girl welcomed the plan with
delight. Grinning with pride Bertuccio disappeared among the stables,
and presently returned, leading an asinetto.  It was a little,
dun-colored thing, wearing a red-tasseled bridle and a small sheepskin
saddle with red girth, but all the gay trappings could not soften the
old primeval sadness of the donkey's face, under his long, questioning
ears.  So Daphne won palfrey and cavalier.

In the succeeding days the two jogged for hours together over the
mountain roads.  Now they followed some grassy path climbing gently
upward to the site of a buried town, where only mound and gray fragment
of stone marked garden and forum.  Here was a bit of wall, with a touch
of gay painting mouldering on an inner surface,--Venus, in robe of red,
rising from a daintily suggested sea in lines of green.  They gathered
fragments of old mosaic floor in their hands, blue lapis lazuli, yellow
bits of giallo antico, red porphyry, trodden by gay feet and sad,
unnumbered years ago.  They found broken pieces of iridescent glass
that had fallen, perhaps, from shattered wine cups of the emperors, and
all these treasures Bertuccio stored away in his wide pockets. Again,
they climbed gracious heights and looked down over slopes and valleys,
where deep grass grew over rich, crumbling earth, deposit of dead
volcanoes, or saw, circled by soft green hills, some mountain lake,
reflecting the perfect blue of Italian sky.

Bertuccio usually walked behind; Daphne rode on ahead, with the sun
burning her cheeks, and the air, fragrant with the odor of late
ripening grapes on the upper hillsides, bringing intoxication. She
seemed to herself so much a thing of falling rain, rich earth, and
wakening sunshines that she would not have been surprised to find the
purple bloom of those same grapes gathering on her cheeks, or her soft
wisps of hair curling into tendrils, or spreading into green vine
leaves.  They usually came home in the splendor of sunset, tired,
happy, the red of Daphne's felt hat, the gorgeousness of Bertuccio's
blue trousers and yellow waistcoat lighting the gloom of the cool,
green-shaded ways.  Hermes always ran frisking to meet them,
outstripping by his swiftness the slow plodding of the little ass.
Perhaps the lambkin felt the shadow of a certain neglect through these
long absences, but at least he was generous and loved his rival.
Quitting the kitchen and dining-room, he chose for his portion the
pasture where the donkey grazed, in silence and in sadness, and frisked
dangerously near his comrade's heels.  For all his melancholy, the
asinetto was not insensible to caresses, and at night, when the lamb
cuddled close to him as the two lay in the grass in the darkness, would
curl his nose round now and then protectingly to see how this small
thing fared.

So Daphne kept forgetting, forgetting, and nothing recalled her to her
perplexity, except her donkey.  San Pietro Martire she named him, for
on his face was written the patience and the suffering of the saints.
Some un-Italian sense of duty stiffened his hard little legs, gave
rigid strength to his back.  Willing to trudge on with his load,
willing to rest, carrying his head a little bent, blinking mournfully
at the world from under the drab hair on his forehead, San Pietro stood
as a type of the disciplined and chastened soul.  His very way of
cropping the grass had something ascetic in it, reminding his mistress
of Eustace at a festive dinner.

"San Pietro, San Pietro," said Daphne one day, when Bertuccio was
plodding far in the rear, whistling as he followed, "San Pietro, must I
do it?"

There was a drooping forward of the ears, a slight bending of the head,
as the little beast put forth more strength to meet the difficulty of
rising ground.

"San Pietro, do you know what you are advising?  Do you at all realize
what it is to be a clergyman's wife?"

The steady straining of the donkey's muscles seemed to say that, to
whatever station in life it pleased Providence to call him, he would
think only of duty.

Then Daphne alighted and sat on a stone, with the donkey's face to
hers, taking counsel of those long ears which were always eloquent,
whether pricked forward in expectation or laid back in wrath.

"San Pietro, if I should give it up, and stay here and live,--for I
never knew before what living is,--if I should just try to keep this
sunshine and these great spaces of color, what would you think of me?"

Eyes, ears, and the tragic corners of the mouth revealed the thought of
this descendant of the burden bearers for all the earth's thousands of
years.

"Little beast, little beast," said Daphne, burying her face in the
brownish fuzz of his neck, and drying her eyes there, "you are the one
thing in this land of beauty that links me with home. You are the
Pilgrim Fathers and the Catechism in one!  You are the Puritan
Conscience made visible!  I will do it; I promise."

San Pietro Martire looked round with mild inquiry on his face as to the
meaning and the purpose of caresses in a hard world like this.



CHAPTER XI

Bertuccio sprawled on his stomach on the grassy floor of the presence
chamber in a palace of the Caesars', kicking with one idle foot a bit
of stone that had once formed the classic nose of a god.  San Pietro
Martire was quietly grazing in the long spaces of the Philosophers'
Hall, nibbling deftly green blades of grass that grew at the bases of
the broken pillars.  Near by lay the old amphitheatre, with its roof of
blue sky, and its rows of grassy seats, circling a level stage and pit,
and rising, one above another, in irregular outlines of green.  Here,
in the spot on which the central royal seat had once been erected, sat
Daphne on her Scotch plaid steamer blanket:  her head was leaning back
against the turf, her lips were slightly parted, her eyes half closed.
She thought that she was meditating on the life that had gone on in
this Imperial villa two thousand years ago:  its banquets, its
philosophers' disputes, its tragedies and comedies played here with
tears and laughter.  In reality she was half asleep.

They were only a half mile from home, measuring by a straight line
through the intervening hill; in time they were two hours away. San
Pietro had climbed gallantly, with little silvery bells tinkling at his
ears, to the summit of the mountain, and had descended, with conviction
and with accuracy, planting firm little hard hoofs in the slippery path
where the dark soil bore a coating of green grass and moss.  For all
their hard morning's work they were still on the confines of the Villa
Gianelli, whose kingdom was partly a kingdom of air and of mountain.

Drowsing there in the old theatre in the sun, Daphne presently saw,
stepping daintily through one of the entrances at the side, an audience
of white sheep.  They overspread the stage, cropping as they went.
They climbed the green encircling seats, leaping up or down, where a
softer tuft of grass invited.  They broke the dreamy silence with the
muffled sound of their hoofs, and an occasional bleat.

The girl knew them now.  She had seen before the brown-faced twins,
both wearing tiny horns; they always kept together.  She knew the great
white ewe with a blue ribbon on her neck, and the huge ram with twisted
horns that made her half afraid.  Would he mind Scotch plaid, she
wondered, as he raised his head and eyed her? She sat alert, ready for
swift flight up the slope behind her in case of attack, but he turned
to his pasture in the pit with the air of one ready to waive trifles,
and the girl leaned back again.

When Apollo, the keeper of sheep, entered, Daphne received his greeting
with no surprise:  even if he had come without these forerunners she
would have known that he was near.  It was she who broke the silence as
he approached.

"A theatre seems a singularly appropriate place for you and your
flock," she remarked.  "You make a capital actor."

There was no laughter in his eyes to-day and he did not answer. A
wistful look veiled the triumphant gladness of his face.

"They didn't play pastorals in olden time, did they?" asked Daphne.

"No," he answered, "they lived them.  When they had forgotten how to do
that they began to act."

He took a flute from his pocket and began to play.  A cry rang out
through the gladness of the notes, and it brought tears to the girl's
eyes.  He stopped, seeing them there, and put the flute back into his
pocket.

"Did you take my advice the other day?" he asked.

"The advice was very general," said Daphne.  "I presume an oracle's
always is.  No, I did not follow it."

"Antigone, Antigone," he murmured.

"Why Antigone?" demanded the girl.

"Because your duty is dearer to you than life, and love."

"Please go down there," said the girl impetuously, "and play Antigone
for me.  Make me see it and feel it.  I have been sitting here for an
hour wishing that I could realize here a tragedy of long ago."

He bowed submissively.

"Commands from Caesar's seat must always be obeyed," he observed. "Do
you know Greek, Antigone?"

She nodded.

"I know part of this play by heart," she faltered.  "My father taught
me Greek words when I was small enough to ride his foot."

He stepped down among the sheep to the grassy stage, laying aside his
hat and letting the sun sparkle on his bright hair.  The odd sheepskin
coat lent a touch of grotesqueness to his beauty as he began.

"'Nay, be thou what thou wilt; but I will bury him:  well for me to die
in doing that.  I shall rest, a loved one with him whom I have loved,
sinless in my crime; for I owe a longer allegiance to the dead than to
the living:  in that world I shall abide forever.'"

Slow, full, and sweet the words came, beating like music on the girl's
heart.  All the sorrow of earth seemed gathered up in the undertones,
all its hunger and thirst for life and love:  in it rang the voice of a
will stronger than death and strong as love.

The sheep lifted their heads and looked on anxiously, as if for a
moment even the heart of a beast were touched by human sorrow. From
over the highest ridge of this green amphitheatre San Pietro looked
down with the air of one who had nothing more to learn of woe.  Apollo
stood in the centre of the stage, taking one voice, then another:  now
the angry tone of the tyrant, Creon, now the wail of the chorus, hurt
but undecided, then breaking into the unspeakable sweetness and
firmness of Antigone's tones.  The sheep went back to their nibbling;
San Pietro trotted away with his jingling bells, but Daphne sat with
her face leaning on her hands, and slow tears trickling over her
fingers.

The despairing lover's cry broke in on Antigone's sorrow; Haemon,
"bitter for the baffled hope of his marriage," pleaded with his father
Creon for the life of his beloved.  Into his arguments for mercy and
justice crept that cry of the music on the hills that had sounded
through lonely hours in Daphne's ears.  It was the old call of passion,
pleading, imperious, irresistible, and the girl on Caesar's seat
answered to it as harp strings answer to the master's hand.  The wail
of Antigone seemed to come from the depths of her own being:--

"Bear me witness, in what sort, unwept of friends, and by what laws I
pass to the rock-closed prison of my strange tomb, ah me unhappy!...
No bridal bed, no bridal song hath been mine, no joy of marriage."

The sun hung low above the encircling hills when the lover's last cry
sounded in the green theatre, drowning grief in triumph as he chose
death with his beloved before all other good.  Then there was silence,
while the round, golden sun seemed resting in a red-gold haze on the
hilltop, and Daphne, sitting with closed eyes, felt the touch of two
hands upon her own.

"Did you understand?" asked a voice that broke in its tenderness.

She nodded, with eyes still closed, for she dared not trust them open.
He bent and kissed her hands, where the tears had fallen on them, then,
turning, called his sheep.  Three minutes later there was no trace of
him or of them:  they had vanished as if by magic, leaving silence and
shadow.  The girl climbed the hill toward home on San Pietro's back,
shaken, awed, afraid.



CHAPTER XII

If Bertuccio had but shown any signs of having seen her companion of
yesterday, Daphne's bewilderment would have been less; but to keep
meeting a being who claimed to belong to another world, who came and
went, invisible, it would seem, when he chose, to other eyes except her
own, might well rouse strange thoughts in the mind of a girl cut off
from her old life in the world of commonplace events.  To be sure, the
shepherd Antoli had seen him, but had spoken of him voluntarily as a
mysterious creature, one of the blessed saints come down to aid the
sick.  The beggar woman had seen him, but had fallen prostrate at his
feet as in awe of supernatural presence.  When the wandering god had
talked across the hedge the eyes of Giacomo and Assunta had apparently
been holden; and now Bertuccio, whose ears were keen, and whose eyes,
in their lazy Italian fashion, saw more then they ever seemed to,
Bertuccio had been all the afternoon within a stone's throw of the
place where the god had played to her, and Bertuccio gave no sign of
having seen a man.  She eyed him questioningly as they started out the
next morning on their way to the ruins of some famous baths on the
mountain facing them.

There was keenness in the autumn air that morning, but the green slopes
far and near bore no trace of flaming color or of decay, as in fall at
home; it was rather like a glimpse of some cool, eternal spring.  A
stream of water trickled down under thick grass at the side of the
road, and violets grew there.

"San Pietro!" said Daphne, with a little tug at the bridle.  The long
ears were jerked hastily back to hear what was to come. "I know you
disapprove of me, for you saw it all."

The ears kept that position in which any one who has ever loved a
donkey recognizes scathing criticism.  Daphne fingered one of them with
her free hand.

"It is only on your back that I feel any strength of mind," she added.
"When I am by myself something seems sweeping me away, as the tides
sweep driftwood out to sea; but here, resolution crawls up through my
body.  We must be a new kind of centaur, San Pietro."

Suddenly her face went down between his ears.

"But if you and I united do drive him away, what shall we
do,--afterwards?"

"Signorina!" called Bertuccio, running up behind them.  "Look! The
olives pick themselves."

At a turn in the road the view had opened.  There, in a great orchard
on the side of the hill, the peasants were gathering olives before the
coming of the frost.  There were scores of pickers wearing great
gay-colored aprons in which they placed the olives as they gathered
them from the trees.  Ladders leaned against knotty tree trunks;
baskets filled with the green fruit stood on the ground.  Ladder and
basket suggested the apple orchards of her native land, but the motley
colors of kerchief and apron, yellow, magenta, turquoise, and green,
and the gray of the eternal olive trees with the deep blue of the sky
behind them, recalled her to the enchanted country where she was fast
losing the landmarks of home.

"Signorina Daphne," said Bertuccio, speaking slowly as to a child, "did
you ever hear them tell of the maiden on the hills up here who was
carried away by a god?"

Daphne turned swiftly and tried to read his face.  It was no less
expressionless than usual.

"No," she answered.  "Tell me.  I am fond of stories."

They were climbing the winding road again, leaving the olive pickers
behind.  Bertuccio walked near, holding the donkey's tail to steady his
steps.

"It was long ago, ages and ages.  Her father had the care of an olive
orchard that was old, older than our Lord," said Bertuccio, devoutly
crossing himself.  "There was one tree in it that was enormously big,
as large as this,--see the measure of my arms! It was open and hollow,
but growing as olives will when there is every reason why they should
be dead.  One night the family were eating their polenta--has the
Signorina tasted our polenta?  It makes itself from chestnuts, and it
is very good.  I must speak to my mother to offer some to the
Signorina.  Well, the door opened without any knocking, and a stranger
stood there:  he was young, and beyond humanity, beautiful."

Bertuccio paused; the girl felt slow red climbing to her cheek. She
dared not look behind, yet she would have given half her possessions to
see the expression of his face.  Leaning forward, she played with the
red tassels at San Pietro's ears.

"Go on! go on!" she commanded.  "Avanti!"

San Pietro thought that the words were meant for him, and indeed they
were more appropriate here for donkey than for man.

"He sat with them and shared their polenta," continued Bertuccio,
walking more rapidly to keep up with San Pietro's quickened step. "And
he made them all afraid.  It was not that he had any terrible look, or
that he did anything strange, only, each glance, each motion told that
he was more than merely man.  And he looked at the maiden with eyes of
love, and she at him," said Bertuccio, lacking art to keep his hearer
in suspense.  "She too was beautiful, as beautiful, perhaps, as the
Signorina," continued the story-teller.

Daphne looked at him sharply:  did he mean any further comparison?
There were hot waves now on neck and face, and her heart was beating
furiously.

"He came often, and he always met the maiden by the hollow tree: it was
large enough for them to stand inside.  And her father and mother were
troubled, for they knew he was a god, not one of our faith, Signorina,
but one of the older gods who lived here before the coming of our Lord.
One day as he stood there by the tree and was kissing the maiden on her
mouth, her father came, very angry, and scolded her, and defied the
god, telling him to go away and never show his face there again.  And
then, he never knew how it happened, for the stranger did not touch
him, but he fell stunned to the ground, with a queer flash of light in
his eyes.  When he woke, the stars were shining over him, and he
crawled home.  But the maiden was gone, and they never saw her any
more, Signorina. Whether it was for good or for ill, she had been
carried away by the god.  People think that they disappeared inside the
tree, for it closed up that night, and it never opened again.
Sometimes they thought they heard voices coming from it, and once or
twice, cries and sobs of a woman.  Maybe she is imprisoned there and
cannot get out:  it would be a terrible fate, would it not, Signorina?
Me, I think it is better to fight shy of the heathen gods."

Bertuccio's white teeth showed in a broad smile, but no scrutiny on
Daphne's part could tell her whether he had told his story for pleasure
merely, or for warning.  She rode on in silence, realizing, as she had
not realized before, how far this peasant stock reached back into the
elder days of the ancient world.

"Do you think that your story is true, Bertuccio?" she asked, as they
came in sight of the grass-grown mounds of the buried watering-place
toward which their steps were bent.

"Ma che!" answered Bertuccio, shrugging his shoulders, and snapping his
fingers meaningly.  "So much is true that one does not see, and one
cannot believe all that one does see."

Daphne started.  What HAD he seen?

"Besides," added Bertuccio, "there is proof of this.  My father's
father saw the olive tree, and it was quite closed."



CHAPTER XIII

Over the shallow tufa basin of the great fountain on the hill Daphne
stood gazing into the water.  She had sought the deep shadow of the
ilex trees, for the afternoon was warm, an almost angry summer heat
having followed yesterday's coolness.  Her yellow gown gleamed like
light against the dull brown of the stone and the dark moss-touched
trunks of the trees.  Whether she was looking at the tufts of fern and
of grass that grew in the wet basin, or whether she was studying her
own beauty reflected there, no one could tell, not even Apollo, who had
been watching her for some time.

Into his eyes as he looked leaped a light like the flame of the
sunshine beyond the shadows on the hill; swiftly he stepped forward and
kissed the girl's shoulder where the thin yellow stuff of her dress
showed the outward curve to the arm.  She turned and faced him, without
a word.  There was no need of speech:  anger battled with unconfessed
joy in her changing face.

"How dare you?" she said presently, when she had won her lips to curves
of scorn.  "The manners of the gods seem strange to mortals."

"I love you," he answered simply.

Then there was no sound save that of the water, dropping over the edge
of the great basin to the soft grass beneath.

"Can't you forgive me?" he asked humbly.  "I am profoundly sorry; only,
my temptation was superhuman."

"I had thought that you were that, too," said the girl in a whisper.

"There is no excuse, I know; there is only a reason.  I love you,
little girl.  I love your questioning eyes, and your firm mouth, and
your smooth brown hair"--

"Stop!" begged Daphne, putting out her hands.  "You must not say such
things to me, for I am not free to hear them.  I must go away," and she
turned toward home.  But he grasped one of the outstretched hands and
drew her to the stone bench near the fountain, and then seated himself
near her side.

"Now tell me what you mean," he said quietly.

"I mean," she answered, with her eyes cast down, "that two years ago I
promised to love some one else.  I must not even hear what you are
trying to say to me."

"I think, Miss Willis," he said gently, "that you should have told me
this before."

"How could I?" begged the girl.  "When could I have done it? Why should
I?"

"I do not know," he answered wearily; "only, perhaps it might have
spared me some shade of human anguish."

"Human?" asked Daphne, almost smiling.

"No, no, no," he interrupted, not hearing her.  "It would not have done
any good, for I have loved you from the first minute when I saw your
blue drapery flutter in your flight from me. Some deeper sense than
mortals have told me that every footstep was falling on my sleeping
heart and waking it to life.  You were not running away; in some divine
sense you were coming toward me. Daphne, Daphne, I cannot let you go!"

The look in the girl's startled eyes was his only answer.  By the side
of this sun-browned face, in its beauty and its power, rose before her
a vision of Eustace Denton, pale, full-lipped, with an ardor for
nothingness in his remote blue eyes.  How could she have known, in
those old days before her revelation came, that faces like this were on
the earth:  how could she have dreamed that glory of life like this was
possible?

In the great strain of the moment they both grew calm and Daphne told
him her story, as much of it as she thought it wise for him to know.
Her later sense of misgiving, the breaking of the engagement, the
penitence that had led to a renewal of the bonds, she concealed from
him; but he learned of the days of study and of quiet work in the
shaded corners of her father's library, and of those gayer days and
evenings when the figure of the young ascetic had seemed to the girl to
have a peculiar saving grace, standing in stern contrast to the social
background of her life.

He thanked her, when she had finished, and he watched her, with her
background of misty blue distance, sitting where the shadow of the
ilexes brought out the color of her scarlet lips and deep gray eyes.

"Daphne," he said presently, "you have told me much about this man, but
you have not told me that you love him.  You do not speak of him as a
woman speaks of the man who makes her world for her. You defend him,
you explain him, you plead his cause, and it must be that you are
pleading it with yourself, for I have brought no charge, that you must
defend him to me.  Do you love him?"

She did not answer.

"Look at me!" he insisted.  Her troubled eyes turned toward his, but
dared not stay, and the lashes fell again.

"Do not commit the crime of marrying a man you do not love," he pleaded.

"But," said the girl slowly, "even if I gave him up I might not care
for you."

"Dear," he said softly, "you do love me.  Is it not so?"

She shook her head, but her face belied her.

"I have waited, waited for you," he pleaded, in that low tone to which
her being vibrated as to masterful music, "so many lifetimes! I have
found you out at last!"

"How long?" she asked willfully.

"Aeons," he answered.  "Since the foundation of the world.  I have
waited, and now that I have found you, I will not let you go.  I will
not let you go!"

She looked at him with wide-opened eyes:  a solemn fear possessed her.
Was it Bertuccio's story of yesterday that filled her with foreboding?
Hardly.  Rather it seemed a pleasant thought that he and she should
feel the bark of one of these great trees closing round them, and
should have so beautiful a screen of brown bark and green moss to hide
their love from all the world.  No, no fear could touch the thought of
any destiny with him:  she was afraid only of herself.

"You are putting a mere nothing between us," the voice went on. "You
are pretending that there is an obstacle when there is none, really."

"Only another man's happiness," murmured the girl.

"I doubt if he knows what happiness is," said Apollo.  "Forgive me, but
will he not be as happy with his altar candles and his chants without
you?  Does he not care more for the abstract cause for which he is
working than for you?  Hasn't he missed the simple meaning of human
life, and can anything teach it to him?"

"How did you know?" asked Daphne, startled.

"The gods should divine some things that are not told!  Besides, I know
the man," he answered, smiling, but Daphne did not hear. She had leaned
back and closed her eyes.  The warm, sweet air, with its odor of earth,
wooed her; the little breeze that made so faint a rustle in the ilex
leaves touched her cheek like quick, fluttering kisses.  The rhythmical
drops from the fountain seemed falling to the music of an old order of
things, some simple, elemental way of loving that made harmony through
all life. Could love, that had meant only duty, have anything to do
with this great joy in mere being, which turned the world to gold?

"I must, I must win you," came the voice again, and it was like a cry.
"Loving with more than human love, I will not be denied!"

She opened her eyes and watched him:  the whole, firmly-knit frame in
the brown golf-suit was quivering.

"It has never turned out well," she said lightly, "when the sons of the
gods married with the daughters of men."

Perhaps he would have rebuked her for the jest, but he saw her face.

"I offer you all that man or god can offer," he said, standing before
her.  "I offer you the devotion of a whole life.  Will you take it?"

"I will not break my promise," said the girl, rising.  Her eyes were
level with his.  She found such power in them that she cried out
against it in sudden anger.

"Why do you tempt me so?  Why do you come and trouble my mind and take
away my peace?  Who are you?  What are you?"

"If you want a human name for me"--he answered.

She raised her hand swiftly to stop him.  "No, don't!" she said. "I do
not want to know.  Don't tell me anything, for the mystery is part of
the beauty of you."

A shaft of golden sunlight pierced the ilex shade and smote her
forehead as she stood there.

"Apollo, the sun god," she said, smiling, as she turned and left him
alone.



CHAPTER XIV

Overhead was a sky of soft, dusky blue, broken by the clear light of
the stars:  all about were the familiar walks of the villa garden,
mysterious now in the darkness, and seeming to lead into infinite
space.  The lines of aloe, fig, and palm stood like shadows guarding a
world of mystery.  Daphne, wandering alone in the garden at midnight,
half exultant, half afraid, stepped noiselessly along the pebbled walks
with a feeling that that world was about to open for her.  Ahead,
through an arch where the thick foliage of the ilexes had been cut to
leave the way clear for the passer-by, a single golden planet shone low
in the west, and the garden path led to it.

Daphne had been unable to sleep, for sleeplessness had become a habit
during the past week.  Whether she was too happy or too unhappy she
could not tell:  she only knew that she was restless and smothering for
air and space.  Hastily dressing, she had stolen on tiptoe down the
broad stairway by the running water and out into the night, carrying a
tiny Greek lamp with a single flame, clear, as only the flame of olive
oil can be.  She had put the lamp down in the doorway, and it was
burning there now, a beacon to guide her footsteps when she wanted to
return. Meanwhile, the air was cool on throat and forehead and on her
open palms: she had no wish to go in.

Here was a fountain whose jets of water, blown high from the mouths of
merry dolphins, fell in spray in a great stone basin where mermaids
waited for the shower to touch bare shoulders and bended heads.  The
murmur of the water, mingled with the murmur of unseen live things, and
the melody of night touched the girl's discordant thoughts to music.
Of what avail, after all, was her fierce struggle for duty?  Here were
soft shadows, and great spaces, and friendly stars.

Of course her lover-god, Apollo, was gone.  She had known the other day
when she left him on the hill that she would not see him again, for the
look of his face had told her that.  Of course, it was better so.  Now,
everything would go on as had been intended. Anna would come home;
after this visit was over, there would be New York again, and Eustace.
Yes, she was brave to share his duty with him, and the years would not
be long.  And always these autumn days would be shining through the
dark hours of her life, these perfect days of sunshine without shadow.
Of their experiences she need not even tell, for she was not sure that
it had actually been real.  She would keep it as a sacred memory that
was half a dream.

She was walking now by the rows of tall chrysanthemums, and she reached
out her fingers to touch them, for she could almost feel their deep
yellow through her finger-tips.  It was like taking counsel of them,
and they, like all nature, were wise.  Cypress and acacia and palm
stood about like strong comforters; help came from the tangled vines
upon the garden wall, from the matted periwinkle on the ground at her
feet, and the sweet late roses blossoming in the dark.

Yes, he was gone, and the beauty and the power of him had vanished. It
was better so, she kept saying to herself, her thoughts, no matter
where they wandered, coming persistently back, as if the idea, so
obviously true, needed proving after all.  The only thing was, she
would have liked to see him just once more to show him how invincible
she was.  He had taken her by surprise that day upon the hill, and had
seen what she had not meant to tell.  Now, if she could confront him
once, absolutely unshaken, could tell him her decision, give him words
of dismissal in a voice that had no tremor in it, as her voice had had
the other day, that would be a satisfactory and triumphant parting for
one who had come badly off.  Her shoulder burned yet where he had
kissed it, and yet she was not angry.  He must have known that day how
little she was vexed.  If she could only see him once again, she said
wistfully to herself, to show him how angry she was, all would be well.

Daphne had wandered to the great stone gate that led out upon the
highway, and was leaning her forehead against a moss-grown post, when
she heard a sudden noise.  Then the voice of San Pietro Martire broke
the stillness of the night, and Daphne, listening, thought she heard a
faint sound of bleating.  Hermes was calling her, and Hermes was in
danger.  Up the long avenue she ran toward the house, and, seizing the
tiny lamp at the doorway, sped up the slope toward the inclosure where
the two animals grazed, the flame making a trail of light like that of
a firefly moving swiftly in the darkness.  The bray rang out again, but
there was no second sound of bleating.  Inside the pasture gate she
found the donkey anxiously sniffing at something that lay in the grass.
Down on her knees went Daphne, for there lay Hermes stretched out on
his side, with traces of blood at his white throat.

The girl put down her lamp and lifted him in her arms.  Some cowardly
dog had done this thing, and had run away on seeing her, or hearing her
unfasten the gate.  She put one finger on the woolly bosom, but the
heart was not beating.  The lamb's awkward legs were stretched out
quite stiffly, and his eyes were beginning to glaze.  Two tears dropped
on the fat white side; then Daphne bent and kissed him.  Looking up,
she saw San Pietro gazing on with the usual grief of his face
intensified.  It was as if he understood that the place at his back
where the lamb had cuddled every night must go cold henceforward.

"We must bury him, San Pietro," said Daphne presently.  "Come help me
find a place."

She put the lambkin gently down upon the ground, and, rising, started,
with one arm over San Pietro's neck, to find a burial place for the
dead.  The donkey followed willingly, for he permitted himself to love
his lady with a controlled but genuine affection; and together they
searched by the light of the firefly lamp.  At last Daphne halted by a
diminutive cypress, perhaps two feet high, and announced that she was
content.

The tool-house was not far away.  Investigating, she found, as she had
hoped, that the door was not locked.  Arming herself with a hoe she
came back, and, under the light of southern stars, dug a little grave
in the soft, dark earth, easily loosened in its crumbling richness.
Then she took the lamp and searched in the deep thick grass for
flowers, coming back with a mass of pink-tipped daisies gathered in her
skirt.  The sight of the brown earth set her to thinking:  there ought
to be some kind of shroud.  Near the tool-house grew a laurel tree, she
remembered, and from that she stripped a handful of green, glossy
leaves, to spread upon the bottom of the grave.  This done, she bore
the body of Hermes to his resting-place, and strewed the corpse with
pink daisies.

"Should he have Christian or heathen burial?" she asked, smiling. "This
seems to be a place where the two faiths meet.  I think neither.  He
must just be given back to Mother Nature."

She heaped the sod over him with her own hands, and fitted neatly
together some bits of turf.  Then she took up her lamp to go. San
Pietro, tired of ceremony, was grazing in the little circle of light.

"To-morrow," said Daphne, as she went down the hill, "he will be eating
grass from Hermes' grave."



CHAPTER XV

The shadow of branching palms fell on the Signorina's hair and hands as
she sat at work near the fountain in the garden weaving a great wreath
of wild cyclamen and of fern gathered from the hillside.  Assunta was
watching her anxiously, her hands resting on her hips.

"It's a poor thing to offer the Madonna," she said at length, "just
common things that grow."

Daphne only smiled at her and went on winding white cord about the
stems under green fronds where it could not be seen.

"I was ready to buy a wreath of beautiful gauze flowers from Rome,"
ventured Assunta, "all colors, red and yellow and purple. I have plenty
of silver for it upstairs in a silk bag.  Our Lady will think I am not
thankful, though the blessed saints know I have never been so thankful
in my life as I am for Bertuccio's coming home when he did."

"The Madonna will know," said Daphne.  "She will like this better than
anything else."

"Are you sure?" asked Assunta dubiously.

"Yes," asserted the girl, laughing.  "She told me so!"

The audacity of the remark had an unexpected effect on the peasant
woman.  Assunta crossed herself.

"Perhaps she did!  Perhaps she did!  And do you think she does not mind
my waiting?"

"No," answered Daphne gravely.  "She knows that you have been very busy
taking care of me."

Assunta trotted away, apparently content, to consult Giacomo about
dinner.  The girl went on weaving with busy fingers, the shadow of her
lashes on her cheek.  As she worked her thoughts wove for her the one
picture that they made always for her now: Apollo standing on the
hillside under the ilexes with the single ray of sunshine touching his
face.  All the rest of her life kept fading, leaving the minutes of
that afternoon alone distinct. And it was ten days ago!

Presently Giacomo came hurrying down the path toward her, dangling his
white apron by its string as he ran.

"Signorina!" he called breathlessly.  "Would the Signorina, when she
has finished that, graciously make another wreath?"

"Certainly.  For you?"

"Not for me," he answered mysteriously, drawing nearer.  "Not for me,
but for Antoli, the shepherd who herds the flock of Count Gianelli.  He
has seen from the window the Signorina making a wreath for our Lady,
and he too wants to present her with a thank-offering for the miracle
she wrought for him.  But will the Signorina permit him to come and
tell her?"

Even while Giacomo was speaking Daphne saw the man slowly approaching,
urged on apparently by encouraging gestures from Assunta, who was
standing at the corner of the house.  A thrill went through the girl's
nerves as she saw the rough brown head of the peasant rising above the
sheepskin coat that the shepherd-god had worn.  Unless miracle had made
another like it, it was the very same, even to the peculiar jagged edge
where it met in front.

Antoli's expression was foolish and ashamed, but at Giacomo's bidding
be began a recital of his recent experiences.  The girl strained her
ears to listen, but hardly a word of this dialect of the Roman hills
was intelligible to her.

The gesture wherewith the shepherd crossed himself, and his devout
pointing to the sky were all she really understood.

Then Giacomo translated.

"Because he was ill--but the Signorina knows the story--the blessed
Saint Sebastian came down to him and guarded the sheep, and he went
home and became well, miraculously well.  See how he is recovered from
his fever!  It was our Lady who wrought it all. Now he comes back and
all his flock is there:  not one is missing, but all are fat and
flourishing.  Does not the Signorina believe that it was some one from
another world who helped him?"

"Si," answered Daphne, looking at the sheepskin coat.

"No one has seen the holy saint except himself, but the blessed one has
appeared again to him.  Antoli came back, afraid that the sheep were
scattered, afraid of being dismissed.  He found his little tent in
order; food was there, and better food than shepherds have, eggs and
wine and bread.  While he waited the blessed one himself came, with
light shining about his hair.  He brought back the coat that he had
worn:  see, is it not proof that he was there?"

"The coat was a new one," interrupted the shepherd.

Giacomo repeated, and went on.

"He smiled and talked most kindly, and when he went away--the Signorina
understands?"

Daphne nodded.

"He gave his hand to Antoli," said Giacomo breathlessly.

"I will make the wreath," said the Signorina, smiling.  "It shall be of
these," and she held up a handful of pink daisies, mingled with bits of
fern and ivy leaves.  "Assunta shall take it to the church when she
takes hers.  I rejoice that you are well," she added, turning to Antoli
with a polite sentence from the phrase-book.

As she worked on after they were gone, Assunta came to her again.

"The Signorina heard?" she asked.

"Si.  Is the story true?" asked Daphne.

Assunta's eyes were full of hidden meaning.

"The Signorina ought to know."

"Why?"

"Has not the Signorina seen the blessed one herself?" she asked.

"I?" said Daphne, starting.

"The night the lambkin was killed, did not the Signorina go out in
great distress, and did not the blessed one come to her aid?"

"Ma che!" exclaimed Daphne faintly, falling back, in her astonishment,
upon Assunta's vocabulary.

"I have told no one, not even Giacomo," said Assunta, "but I saw it
all.  The noise had wakened me, and I followed, but I stopped when I
saw that the divine one was there.  Only I watched from the clump of
cypress trees."

"Where was he?" asked Daphne with unsteady voice.

"Beyond the laurel trees," said Assunta.  "Did not the Signorina see?"

The girl shook her head.

"How did you know that he was one of the divine?" she asked.

"Can I not tell the difference between mortal man and one of them?"
cried the peasant woman scornfully.  "It was the shining of his face,
and the light about his hair, Signorina.  Every look and every motion
showed that he was not of this world.  Besides, how could I see him in
the dark if he were not the blessed Saint Sebastian?  And who sent the
dog away if it was not he?" she added triumphantly.

"But why should he appear to me?" asked Daphne.  "I have no claim upon
the help of the saints."

"Perhaps because the Signorina is a heretic," answered Assunta
tenderly.  "Our Lady must have special care for her if she sends out
the holy ones to bring her to the fold."

The woman's face was alight with reverence and pride, and Daphne turned
back to her flowers, shamed by these peasant folk for their belief in
the immanence of the divine.

Half an hour later Assunta reappeared, clad in Sunday garments, wearing
her best coral earrings and her little black silk shoulder shawl
covered with gay embroidered flowers.  She held out a letter to the
girl.

"I go to take the wreaths to Our Lady," she announced, "and to confess
and pray.  The Signorina has made them pretty, if they are but common
things."

Daphne was reading her letter; even the peasant woman could see that it
bore glad tidings, for the light that broke in the girl's face was like
the coming of dawn over the hills.

"Wait, Assunta," she said quietly, when she had finished, and she
disappeared among the trees.  In a minute she came back with three
crimson roses, single, and yellow at the heart.

"Will you take them with your wreaths for me to the Madonna?" she said,
putting them into Assunta's hand.  "I am more thankful than either one
of you."



CHAPTER XVI

Assunta had carried a small tray out to the arbor in the garden, and
Daphne was having her afternoon tea there alone.  About her, on the
frescoed walls of this little open-air pavilion, were grouped pink
shepherds and shepherdesses, disporting themselves in airy garments of
blue and green in a meadow that ended abruptly to make room for long
windows.  The girl leaned back and sipped her tea luxuriously.  She was
clad in a gown that any shepherdess among them might have envied, a
pale yellow crepy thing shot through with gleams of gold.  Before her
the Countess Accolanti's silver service was set out on an inlaid
Florentine table, partially protected by an open work oriental scarf.
Upon it lay the letter that had come an hour before, and the Signorina
now and then feasted her eyes upon it.  Just outside the door was a
bust of Masaccio, set on a tall pedestal, grass growing on the rough
hair and heavy eyelids.  Pavilion and tea-table seemed an odd bit of
convention, set down in the neglected wildness of this old garden, and
Daphne watched it all with entire satisfaction over her Sevres teacup.

Presently she was startled by seeing Assunta come hurrying back with a
teacup and saucer in one hand, a hot water jug in the other. The rapid
Italian of excited moments Daphne never pretended to understand,
consequently she gathered from Assunta's incoherent words neither names
nor impressions, only the bare fact that a caller for the Countess
Accolanti had rung the bell.

"He inquired, too, for the Signorina," remarked the peasant woman
finally, when her breath had nearly given out.

"Do you know him?" asked Daphne.  "Have you seen him before?"

"But yes, thousands of times," said Assunta in a stage whisper. "See,
he comes.  I thought it best to say that he would find the Signorina in
the garden.  And the Signorina must pardon me for the card:  I dropped
it into the tea-kettle and it is wet, quite wet."

Assunta had time to note with astonishment before she left that hostess
and caller met as old friends, for the Signorina held out her hand in
greeting before a word of introduction had been said.

"I am told that your shepherd life is ended," remarked Daphne, as she
filled the cup just brought.  Neither her surprise nor her joy in his
coming showed in her face.

"For the present, yes."

"You have won great devotion," said Daphne, smiling.  "Only, they all
mistake you for a Christian saint."

"What does it matter?" said Apollo.  "The feeling is the same."

"Assunta knew you at once as one of those in her calendar," the girl
went on, "but she seems to recognize your supernatural qualities only
by lamplight.  I am a little bit proud that I can detect them by day as
well."

Her gayety met no response from him, and there was a long pause. To the
girl it seemed that the enveloping sunshine of the garden was only a
visible symbol of her new divine content.  If she had looked closely,
which she dared not do, she would have seen that the lurking sadness in
the man's face had leaped to the surface, touching the brown eyes with
a look of eternal grief.

"I ventured to stop," he said presently, "because I was not sure that
happy chance would throw us together again.  I have come to say
good-by."

"You are going away?"

"I am going away," he answered slowly.

"So shall I, some day," said Daphne, "and then moss will grow green on
my seat by the fountain, and San Pietro will be sold to some peddler
who will beat him.  Of course it had to end! Sometimes, when you tread
the blue heights of Olympus, will you think of me walking on the hard
pavements of New York?"

"I shall think of you, yes," he said, failing to catch her merriment.

"And if you ever want a message from me," she continued, "you must look
for it on your sacred laurel here on the hill by Hermes' grave.  It is
just possible, you know, that I shall be inside, and if I am, I shall
speak to you through my leaves, when you wander that way."

Something in the man's face warned her, and her voice became grave.

"Why do you go?" she asked.

"It is the only thing to do," he answered.  "Life has thrown me back
into the old position, and I must face the same foes again. I always
rush too eagerly to snatch my good; I always hit my head against some
impassable wall.  I thought I had won my battles and was safe, and then
you came."

The life had gone out of his voice, the light from his face. Looking at
him Daphne saw above his temples a touch of gray in the golden brown of
his hair.

"And then?" she asked softly.

"Then my hard-won control vanished, and I felt that I could stake my
hopes of heaven and my fears of hell to win you."

"A Greek god, with thoughts of hell?" murmured Daphne.

"Hell," he answered, "is a feeling, not a place, as has often been
observed.  I happen to be in it now, but it does not matter. Yes, I am
going away, Daphne, Daphne.  You say that there are claims upon you
that you cannot thrust aside.  I shall go, but in some life, some time,
I shall find you again."

Daphne looked at him with soft triumph in her eyes.  Secure in the
possession of that letter on the table, she would not tell him yet!
This note of struggle gave deeper melody to the joyous music of the
shepherd on the hills.

"I asked you once about your life and all that had happened to you:  do
you remember?" he inquired.  "I have never told you of my own.  Will
you let me tell you now?"

"If you do not tell too much and explain yourself away," she answered.

"It is a story of tragedy, and of folly, recognized too late. I have
never told it to any human being, but I should like you to understand.
It has been an easy life, so far as outer circumstances go.  Until I
was eighteen I was lord and dictator in a household of women, spoiled
by mother and sisters alike. Then came the grief of my life.  Oh, I
cannot tell it, even to you!"

The veins stood out on his forehead, and his face was indeed like the
face of a tortured Saint Sebastian.  The girl's eyes were sweet with
sympathy, and with something else that he did not look to see.

"There was a plan made for a journey.  I opposed it for some selfish
whim, for I had a scheme of my own.  They yielded to me as they always
did, and took my way.  That day there was a terrible accident, and all
who were dear to me were killed, while I, the murderer, was cursed with
life.  So, when I was eighteen, my world was made up of four graves in
the cemetery at Rome, and of that memory.  Whatever the world may say,
I was as guilty of those deaths as if I had caused them by my own hand."

He had covered his face with his palms, and his head was bent. The girl
reached out as if to touch the rumpled brown hair with consoling
fingers, then drew her hand back.  In a moment, when her courage came,
he should know what share of comfort she was ready to give him.
Meanwhile, she hungered to make the farthest reach of his suffering her
own.

"Since then?" she asked softly.

"Since then I have been trying to build my life up out of its ruins.  I
have tried to win content and even gladness, for I hold that man should
be master of himself, even of remorse for his old sins.  You see, I've
been busy trying to find out people who had the same kind of misery, or
some other kind, to face."

"Shepherd of the wretched," said the girl dreamily.

"Something like that," he answered.

The girl's face was all a-quiver for pity of the tale; in listening to
the story of his life she had completely forgotten her own. Then,
before she knew what was happening, he rose abruptly and held out his
hand.

"Every minute that I stay makes matters harder," he said.  "I've got to
go to see if I cannot win gladness even out of this, for still my
gospel is the gospel of joy.  Good-by."

Suddenly Daphne realized that he was gone!  She could hear his
footsteps on the pebble-stones of the walk as he swung on with his long
stride.  She started to run after him, then stopped. After all, how
could she find words for what she had to say? Walking to the great gate
by the highway she looked wistfully between its iron rods, for one last
glimpse of him.  A sudden realization came to her that she knew nothing
about him, not even an address, "except Delphi," she said whimsically
to herself. Only a minute ago he had been there; and now she had
wantonly let him go out of her life forever.

"I wonder if the Madonna threw my roses away," she thought, coming back
with slow feet to the arbor, and realizing for the first time since she
had reached the Villa Accolanti that she was alone, and very far away
from home.



CHAPTER XVII

San Pietro and Bertuccio were waiting at the doorway, both blinking
sleepily in the morning air.  At San Pietro's right side hung a tiny
pannier, covered by a fringed white napkin, above which lay a small
flask decorated with corn husk and gay yarn, where red wine sparkled
like rubies in the sunshine.  The varying degrees of the donkey's
resignation were registered exactly in the changing angles at which his
right ear was cocked.

"Pronta!" called Assunta, who was putting the finishing touches on
saddle and luncheon basket.  "If the Signorina means to climb the Monte
Altiera she must start before the sun is high."

On the hillside above Daphne heard, but her feet strayed only more
slowly.  She was wandering with a face like that of a sky across which
thin clouds scud, in the grass about Hermes' grave. In her hand was the
letter of yesterday, and in her eyes the memory of the days before.

"It is all too late," said Daphne, who had learned to talk aloud in
this world where no one understood.  "The Greeks were right in thinking
that our lives are ruled by mocking fate.  I wonder what angry goddess
cast forgetfulness upon my mind, so that I forgot to tell Apollo what
this letter says."

Daphne looked to the open sky, but it gave no answer, and she paused by
the laurel tree with head bent down.  Then, with a sudden, wistful
little laugh, she held out the letter and fastened it to the laurel,
tearing a hole in one corner to let a small bare twig go through.  With
a blunt pencil she scribbled on it in large letters:  "Let Apollo read,
if he ever wanders this way."

"He will never find it," said the girl, "and the rain will come and
soak it, and it will bleach in the sun.  But nobody else knows enough
to read it, and I shall leave it there on his sacred tree, as my last
offering.  I suppose there is some saving grace even in the sacrifices
that go astray."

Then she descended the hill, climbed upon San Pietro's back, and rode
through the gateway.

An hour later, Assunta, going to find a spade in the tool-house, for
she was transplanting roses, came upon the Signorina's caller of
yesterday standing near the tool-house with something in his hand.  The
peasant woman's face showed neither awe nor fear; only lively curiosity
gleamed in the blinking brown eyes.

"Buon' giorno," said Apollo, exactly as mortals do.

"Buon' giorno, Altezza," returned Assunta.

"Is the Signorina at home?" asked the intruder.

"But no!" cried Assunta.  "She has started to climb the very sky
to-day, Monte Altiera, and for what I can't make out.  It only wears
out Bertuccio's shoes and the asinetto's legs."

"Grazia," said Apollo, moving away.

"Does his Highness think that the Signorina resembles her sister, the
Contessa?" asked the peasant woman for the sake of a detaining word.

"Not at all," answered the visitor, and he passed into the open road.

Then he turned over in his hand the letter which he had taken from the
laurel.  Though he had read it thee times he hardly understood as yet,
and his face was the face of one who sees that the incredible has come
to pass.  The letter was made up of fifteen closely written pages, and
it told the story of a young clergyman, who, convinced at last that
celibacy and the shelter of the Roman priesthood were his true
vocation, had, after long prayer and much mediation, decided to flee
the snares of the world and to renounce its joys for the sake of bliss
the other side of life.

"When you receive this letter, my dear Daphne," wrote Eustace Denton,
"I shall have been taken into the brotherhood of Saint Ambrose, for I
wish to place myself in a position where there will be no retracing my
steps."

The face of the reader on the Roman hills, as it was lifted from the
page again to the sunshine, was full of the needless pity of an alien
faith.

Along the white road that led up the mountain, and over the grass-grown
path that climbed the higher slopes, trod a solitary traveler.  Now his
step was swift, as if some invisible spirit of the wind were wafting
him on; and again the pace was slow and his head bent, as if some deep
thought stayed his speed.  There were green slopes above, green slopes
below, and the world opened out as he climbed on and up.  Out and out
sketched the great Campagne, growing wider at each step, with the gray,
unbroken lines of aqueduct leading toward Rome and the shining sea
beyond.

      *      *      *      *      *

On a great flat stone far up on the heights sat two motionless figures:
below them, partly veiling the lower world, floated a thin mist of
cloud.

"This must be Olympus," said Daphne.

"Any mountain is Olympus that touches the sky," answered Apollo.

"Where are the others?" demanded the girl.  "Am I not to know your
divine friends?"

"Don't you see them?" he asked as in surprise,--"Aphrodite just yonder
in violet robe, and Juno, and Hermes with winged feet"--

"I am afraid I am a wee bit blind, being but mortal," answered Daphne.
"I can see nothing but you."

Beside them on the rock, spread out on oak leaves, lay clusters of
purple grapes, six black ripe olives, and a little pile of biscotti
Inglesi.  The girl bent and poured from the curving flask red wine that
bubbled in the glass, then gave it to her companion, saying:  "Quick,
before Hebe gets here," and the sound of their merriment rung down the
hillside.

"Hark!" whispered Daphne.  "I hear an echo of the unquenchable laughter
of the gods!  They cannot be far away."

From another stone near at hand Bertuccio watched them with eyes that
feigned not to see.  Bertuccio did not understand English, but he
understood everything else.  Goodly shares of the nectar and ambrosia
of this feast had fallen to his lot, and Bertuccio in his own way was
almost as happy as the lovers.  In the soft grass near San Pietro
Martire nibbled peacefully, now and then lifting his eyes to see what
was going on.  Once he brayed.  He alone, of all nature, seemed
impervious to the joy that had descended upon earth.

It was only an hour since Daphne had been overtaken.  Few words had
sufficed for understanding, and Bertuccio had looked away.

"My only fear was that I should find you turned into a laurel tree,"
said Apollo.  "I shall always be afraid of that."

"Apollo," said Daphne irrelevantly, holding out to him a bunch of
purple grapes in the palm of her hand, "there is a practical side to
all this.  People will have to know, I am afraid.  I must write to my
sister."

"I have reason to think that the Countess Accolanti will not be
displeased," he answered.  There was a queer little look about his
mouth, but Daphne asked for no explanation.

"There is your father," he suggested.

"Oh!" said Daphne.  "He will love you at once.  His tastes and mine are
very much alike."

The lover-god smiled, quite satisfied.

"You chose the steepest road of all to-day, little girl," he said. "But
it is not half so long nor so hard as the one I expected to climb to
find you."

"You are tired!" said Daphne anxiously.  "Rest."

Bertuccio was sleeping on his flat rock; San Pietro lay down for a
brief, ascetic slumber.  The lovers sat side by side, with the mystery
of beauty about them:  the purple and gold of nearness and distance;
bright color of green grass near, sombre tint of cypress and stone pine
afar.

"I shall never really know whether you are a god or not," said Daphne
dreamily.

"A very proper attitude for a woman to have toward her husband," he
answered with a smile.  "I must try hard to live up to the character.
You will want to live on Olympus, and you really ought, if you are
going to wear gowns woven of my sunbeams like the one you had on
yesterday.  How shall I convince you that Rome must do part of the
time?  You will want me to make you immortal: that always happens when
a maiden marries a god."

"I think you have done that already," said Daphne.









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Daphne, An Autumn Pastoral, by 
Margaret Pollock Sherwood

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK DAPHNE, AN AUTUMN PASTORAL ***

***** This file should be named 2438.txt or 2438.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/3/2438/

Produced by Stephanie L. Johnson.  HTML version by Al Haines.

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
