The Project Gutenberg EBook The Trespasser, by Gilbert Parker, v1
#46 in our series by Gilbert Parker

Copyright laws are changing all over the world. Be sure to check the
copyright laws for your country before downloading or redistributing
this or any other Project Gutenberg eBook.

This header should be the first thing seen when viewing this Project
Gutenberg file.  Please do not remove it.  Do not change or edit the
header without written permission.

Please read the "legal small print," and other information about the
eBook and Project Gutenberg at the bottom of this file.  Included is
important information about your specific rights and restrictions in
how the file may be used.  You can also find out about how to make a
donation to Project Gutenberg, and how to get involved.


**Welcome To The World of Free Plain Vanilla Electronic Texts**

**EBooks Readable By Both Humans and By Computers, Since 1971**

*****These EBooks Were Prepared By Thousands of Volunteers*****


Title: The Trespasser, Volume 1.

Author: Gilbert Parker

Release Date: August, 2004  [EBook #6219]
[Yes, we are more than one year ahead of schedule]
[This file was first posted on September 27, 2002]

Edition: 10

Language: English


*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TRESPASSER, BY PARKER, V1 ***



This eBook was produced by David Widger <widger@cecomet.net>



[NOTE: There is a short list of bookmarks, or pointers, at the end of the
file for those who may wish to sample the author's ideas before making an
entire meal of them.  D.W.]





THE TRESPASSER

By Gilbert Parker


CONTENTS:
Volume 1
I.        ONE IN SEARCH OF A KINGDOM
II.       IN WHICH HE CLAIMS HIS OWN
III.      HE TELLS THE STORY OF HIS LIFE
IV.       AN HOUR WITH HIS FATHER'S PAST
V.        WHEREIN HE FINDS HIS ENEMY

Volume 2.
VI.       WHICH TELLS OF STRANGE ENCOUNTERS
VII.      WHEREIN THE SEAL OF HIS HERITAGE IS SET
VIII.     HE ANSWERS AN AWKWARD QUESTION
IX.       HE FINDS NEW SPONSORS
X.        HE COMES TO "THE WAKING OF THE FIRE"
XI.       HE MAKES A GALLANT CONQUEST

Volume 3.
XII.      HE STANDS BETWEEN TWO WORLDS
XIII.     HE JOURNEYS AFAR
XIV.      IN WHICH THE PAST IS REPEATED
XV.       WHEREIN IS SEEN THE OLD ADAM AND THE GARDEN
XVI.      WHEREIN LOVE SNOWS NO LAW SAVE THE MAN'S
XVII.     THE MAN AND THE WOMAN FACE THE INTOLERABLE
XVIII.    "RETURN, O SHULAMITE!"




INTRODUCTION

While I was studying the life of French Canada in the winter of 1892,
in the city of Quebec or in secluded parishes, there was forwarded to me
from my London home a letter from Mr. Arrowsmith, the publisher, asking
me to write a novel of fifty thousand or sixty thousand words for what
was called his Annual.  In this Annual had appeared Hugh Conway's 'Called
Back' and Anthony Hope's 'Prisoner of Zenda', among other celebrated
works of fiction.  I cabled my acceptance of the excellent offer made me,
and the summer of 1893 found me at Audierne, in Brittany, with some
artist friends--more than one of whom has since come to eminence--living
what was really an out-door literary life; for the greater part of 'The
Trespasser' was written in a high-walled garden on a gentle hill, and the
remainder in a little tower-like structure of the villa where I lodged,
which was all windows.  The latter I only used when it rained, and the
garden was my workshop.  There were peaches and figs on the walls,
pleasant shrubs surrounded me, and the place was ideally quiet and
serene.  Coffee or tea and toast was served me at 6.30 o'clock A.M., my
pad was on my knee at 8, and then there was practically uninterrupted
work till 12, when 'dejeuner a la fourchette', with its fresh sardines,
its omelettes, and its roast chicken, was welcome.  The afternoon was
spent on the sea-shore, which is very beautiful at Audierne, and there I
watched my friends painting sea-scapes.  In the late afternoon came
letter-writing and reading, and after a little and simple dinner at 6.30
came bed at 9.45 or thereabouts.  In such conditions for many weeks I
worked on The Trespasser; and I think the book has an outdoor spirit
which such a life would inspire.

It was perhaps natural that, having lived in Canada and Australia,
and having travelled greatly in all the outer portions of the Empire,
I should be interested in and impelled to write regarding the impingement
of the outer life of our far dominions, through individual character,
upon the complicated, traditional, orderly life of England.  That feeling
found expression in The Translation of a Savage, and I think that in
neither case the issue of the plot or the plot--if such it may be called
--nor the main incident, was exaggerated.  Whether the treatment was free
from exaggeration, it is not my province to say.  I only know what I
attempted to do.  The sense produced by the contact of the outer life
with a refined, and perhaps overrefined, and sensitive, not to say
meticulous, civilisation, is always more sensational than the touch of
the representative of "the thousand years" with the wide, loosely
organised free life of what is still somewhat hesitatingly called the
Colonies, though the same remark could be applied to all new lands, such
as the United States.  The representative of the older life makes no
signs, or makes little collision at any rate, when he touches the new
social organisms of the outer circle.  He is not emphatic; he is typical,
but not individual; he seeks seclusion in the mass.  It is not so with
the more dynamic personality of the over-sea citizen.  For a time at
least he remains in the old civilisation an entity, an isolated,
unabsorbed fact which has capacities for explosion.  All this was in my
mind when The Trespasser was written, and its converse was 'The Pomp of
the Lavilettes', which showed the invasion of the life of the outer land
by the representative of the old civilisation.

I do not know whether I had the thought that the treatment of such themes
was interesting or not.  The idea of The Trespasser was there in my mind,
and I had to use it.  At the beginning of one's career, if one were to
calculate too carefully, impulse, momentum, daring, original conception
would be lost.  To be too audacious, even to exaggerate, is no crime in
youth nor in the young artist.  As a farmer once said to me regarding a
frisky mount, it is better to smash through the top bar than to have
spring-halt.

The Trespasser took its place, and, as I think, its natural place, in the
development of my literary life.  I did not stop to think whether it was
a happy theme or not, or whether it had popular elements.  These things
did not concern me.  When it was written I should not have known what was
a popular theme.  It was written under circumstances conducive to its
artistic welfare; if it has not as many friends as 'The Right of Way' or
'The Seats of the Mighty' or 'The Weavers' or 'The Judgment House', that
is not the fault of the public or of the critics.




TO DOUGLAS ROBINSON, Esq.,

AND

FRANK A.  HILTON, Esq.

My dear Douglas and Frank:

I feel sure that this dedication will give you as much pleasure as it
does me.  It will at least be evidence that I do not forget good days in
your company here and there in the world.  I take pleasure in linking
your names; for you, who have never met, meet thus in the porch of a
little house that I have built.

You, my dear Douglas, will find herein scenes, times, and things familiar
to you; and you, my dear Frank, reflections of hours when we camped by an
idle shore, or drew about the fire of winter nights, and told tales worth
more than this, for they were of the future, and it is of the past.

                    Always sincerely yours,
                              GILBERT PARKER.




THE TRESPASSER

CHAPTER I

ONE IN SEARCH OF A KINGDOM

Why Gaston Belward left the wholesome North to journey afar, Jacques
Brillon asked often in the brawling streets of New York, and oftener in
the fog of London as they made ready to ride to Ridley Court.  There was
a railway station two miles from the Court, but Belward had had enough of
railways.  He had brought his own horse Saracen, and Jacques's broncho
also, at foolish expense, across the sea, and at a hotel near Euston
Station master and man mounted and set forth, having seen their worldly
goods bestowed by staring porters, to go on by rail.

In murky London they attracted little notice; but when their hired guide
left them at the outskirts, and they got away upon the highway towards
the Court, cottagers stood gaping.  For, outside the town there was no
fog, and the fresh autumn air drew the people abroad.

"What is it makes 'em stare, Jacques?" asked Belward, with a humorous
sidelong glance.

Jacques looked seriously at the bright pommel of his master's saddle and
the shining stirrups and spurs, dug a heel into the tender skin of his
broncho, and replied:

"Too much silver all at once."

He tossed his curling black hair, showing up the gold rings in his ears,
and flicked the red-and-gold tassels of his boots.

"You think that's it, eh?" rejoined Belward, as he tossed a shilling to
a beggar.

"Maybe, too, your great Saracen to this tot of a broncho, and the grand
homme to little Jacques Brillon."  Jacques was tired and testy.

The other laid his whip softly on the half-breed's shoulder.

"See, my peacock: none of that.  You're a spanking good servant, but
you're in a country where it's knuckle down man to master; and what they
do here you've got to do, or quit--go back to your pea-soup and caribou.
That's as true as God's in heaven, little Brillon.  We're not on the
buffalo trail now.  You understand?"

Jacques nodded.

"Hadn't you better say it?"

The warning voice drew up the half-breed's face swiftly, and he replied:

"I am to do what you please."

"Exactly.  You've been with me six years--ever since I turned Bear Eye's
moccasins to the sun; and for that you swore you'd never leave me.  Did
it on a string of holy beads, didn't you, Frenchman?"

"I do it again."

He drew out a rosary, and disregarding Belward's outstretched hand, said:

"By the Mother of God, I will never leave you!"  There was a kind of
wondering triumph in Belward's eyes, though he had at first shrunk from
Jacques's action, and a puzzling smile came.

"Wherever I go, or whatever I do?"

"Whatever you do, or wherever you go."

He put the rosary to his lips, and made the sign of the cross.

His master looked at him curiously, intently.  Here was a vain, naturally
indolent half-breed, whose life had made for selfishness and
independence, giving his neck willingly to a man's heel, serving
with blind reverence, under a voluntary vow.

"Well, it's like this, Jacques," Belward said presently; "I want you, and
I'm not going to say that you'll have a better time than you did in the
North, or on the Slope; but if you'd rather be with me than not, you'll
find that I'll interest you.  There's a bond between us, anyway.  You're
half French, and I'm one-fourth French, and more.  You're half Indian,
and I'm one-fourth Indian--no more.  That's enough.  So far, I haven't
much advantage.  But I'm one-half English--King's English, for there's
been an offshoot of royalty in our family somewhere, and there's the
royal difference.  That's where I get my brains--and manners."

"Where did you get the other?" asked Jacques, shyly, almost furtively.

"Money?"

"Not money--the other."

Belward spurred, and his horse sprang away viciously.  A laugh came back
on Jacques, who followed as hard as he could, and it gave him a feeling
of awe.  They were apart for a long time, then came together again, and
rode for miles without a word.  At last Belward, glancing at a sign-post
before an inn door, exclaimed at the legend--"The Whisk o' Barley,"--and
drew rein.  He regarded the place curiously for a minute.  The landlord
came out.  Belward had some beer brought.

A half-dozen rustics stood gaping, not far away.  He touched his horse
with a heel.  Saracen sprang towards them, and they fell back alarmed.
Belward now drank his beer quietly, and asked question after question of
the landlord, sometimes waiting for an answer, sometimes not--a kind of
cross-examination.  Presently he dismounted.

As he stood questioning, chiefly about Ridley Court and its people,
a coach showed on the hill, and came dashing down and past.  He lifted
his eyes idly, though never before had he seen such a coach as swings
away from Northumberland Avenue of a morning.  He was not idle, however;
but he had not come to England to show surprise at anything.  As the
coach passed his face lifted above the arm on the neck of the horse,
keen, dark, strange.  A man on the box-seat, attracted at first by the
uncommon horses and their trappings, caught Belward's eyes.  Not he
alone, but Belward started then.  Some vague intelligence moved the minds
of both, and their attention was fixed till the coach rounded a corner
and was gone.

The landlord was at Belward's elbow.

"The gentleman on the box-seat be from Ridley Court.  That's Maister Ian
Belward, sir."

Gaston Belward's eyes half closed, and a sombre look came, giving his
face a handsome malice.  He wound his fingers in his horse's mane, and
put a foot in the stirrup.

"Who is 'Maister Ian'?"

"Maister Ian be Sir William's eldest, sir.  On'y one that's left, sir.
On'y three to start wi': and one be killed i' battle, and one had trouble
wi' his faither and Maister Ian; and he went away and never was heard on
again, sir.  That's the end on him."

"Oh, that's the end on him, eh, landlord?  And how long ago was that?"

"Becky, lass," called the landlord within the door, "wheniver was it
Maister Robert turned his back on the Court--iver so while ago?  Eh, a
fine lad that Maister Robert as iver I see!"

Fat laborious Becky hobbled out, holding an apple and a knife.  She
blinked at her husband, and then at the strangers.

"What be askin' o' the Court?" she said.  Her husband repeated the
question.

She gathered her apron to her eyes with an unctuous sob:

"Doan't a' know when Maister Robert went!  He comes, i' the house 'ere
and says, 'Becky, gie us a taste o' the red-top-and where's Jock?' He was
always thinkin' a deal o' my son Jock.  'Jock be gone,' I says, 'and I
knows nowt o' his comin' back'--meanin', I was, that day.  'Good for
Jock!' says he, 'and I'm goin' too, Becky, and I knows nowt o' my comin'
back.'  'Where be goin', Maister Robert?' I says.  'To hell, Becky,' says
he, and he laughs.  'From hell to hell.  I'm sick to my teeth o' one,
I'll try t'other'--a way like that speaks he."

Belward was impatient, and to hurry the story he made as if to start on.
Becky, seeing, hastened.  "Dear a' dear!  The red-top were afore him, and
I tryin' to make what become to him.  He throws arm 'round me, smacks me
on the cheek, and says he: 'Tell Jock to keep the mare, Becky.'  Then he
flings away, and never more comes back to the Court.  And that day one
year my Jock smacks me on the cheek, and gets on the mare; and when I
ask: 'Where be goin'?' he says: 'For a hunt i' hell wi' Maister Robert,
mother.'  And from that day come back he never did, nor any word.  There
was trouble wi' the lad-wi' him and Maister Robert at the Court; but I
never knowed nowt o' the truth.  And it's seven-and-twenty years since
Maister Robert went."

Gaston leaned over his horse's neck, and thrust a piece of silver into
the woman's hands.

"Take that, Becky Lawson, and mop your eyes no more."

She gaped.

"How dost know my name is Becky Lawson?  I havena been ca'd so these
three-and-twenty years--not since a' married good man here, and put
Jock's faither in 's grave yander."

"The devil told me," he answered, with a strange laugh, and, spurring,
they were quickly out of sight.  They rode for a couple of miles without
speaking.  Jacques knew his master, and did not break the silence.
Presently they came over a hill, and down upon a little bridge.  Belward
drew rein, and looked up the valley.  About two miles beyond the roofs
and turrets of the Court showed above the trees.  A whimsical smile came
to his lips.

"Brillon," he said, "I'm in sight of home."

The half-breed cocked his head.  It was the first time that Belward had
called him "Brillon"--he had ever been "Jacques."  This was to be a part
of the new life.  They were not now hunting elk, riding to "wipe out" a
camp of Indians or navvies, dining the owner of a rancho or a deputation
from a prairie constituency in search of a member, nor yet with a senator
at Washington, who served tea with canvas-back duck and tooth-picks with
dessert.  Once before had Jacques seen this new manner--when Belward
visited Parliament House at Ottawa, and was presented to some notable
English people, visitors to Canada.  It had come to these notable folk
that Mr. Gaston Belward had relations at Ridley Court, and that of itself
was enough to command courtesy.  But presently, they who would be
gracious for the family's sake, were gracious for the man's.  He had that
which compelled interest--a suggestive, personal, distinguished air.
Jacques knew his master better than any one else knew him; and yet he
knew little, for Belward was of those who seem to give much confidence,
and yet give little--never more than he wished.

"Yes, monsieur, in sight of home," Jacques replied, with a dry cadence.

"Say 'sir,' not 'monsieur,' Brillon; and from the time we enter the Court
yonder, look every day and every hour as you did when the judge asked you
who killed Tom Daly."

Jacques winced, but nodded his head.  Belward continued:

"What you hear me tell is what you can speak of; otherwise you are blind
and dumb.  You understand?" Jacques's face was sombre, but he said
quickly: "Yes--sir."

He straightened himself on his horse, as if to put himself into
discipline at once--as lead to the back of a racer.

Belward read the look.  He drew his horse close up.  Then he ran an arm
over the other's shoulder.

"See here, Jacques.  This is a game that's got to be played up to the
hilt.  A cat has nine lives, and most men have two.  We have.  Now
listen.  You never knew me mess things, did you?  Well, I play for keeps
in this; no monkeying.  I've had the life of Ur of the Chaldees; now for
Babylon.  I've lodged with the barbarian; here are the roofs of ivory.
I've had my day with my mother's people; voila!  for my father's.  You
heard what Becky Lawson said.  My father was sick of it at twenty-five,
and got out.  We'll see what my father's son will do.  .  .  .  I'm going
to say my say to you, and have done with it.  As like as not there isn't
another man that I'd have brought with me.  You're all right.  But I'm
not going to rub noses.  I stick when I do stick, but I know what's got
to be done here; and I've told you.  You'll not have the fun out of it
that I will, but you won't have the worry.  Now, we start fresh.  I'm to
be obeyed; I'm Napoleon.  I've got a devil, yet it needn't hurt you, and
it won't.  But if I make enemies here--and I'm sure to--let them look
out.  Give me your hand, Jacques; and don't you forget that there are two
Gaston Belwards, and the one you have hunted and lived with is the one
you want to remember when you get raw with the new one.  For you'll hear
no more slang like this from me, and you'll have to get used to lots of
things."

Without waiting reply, Belward urged on his horse, and at last paused on
the top of a hill, and waited for Jacques.  It was now dusk, and the
landscape showed soft, sleepy, and warm.

"It's all of a piece," Belward said to himself, glancing from the trim
hedges, the small, perfectly-tilled fields and the smooth roads, to
Ridley Court itself, where many lights were burning and gates opening and
shutting.  There was some affair on at the Court, and he smiled to think
of his own appearance among the guests.

"It's a pity I haven't clothes with me, Brillon; they have a show going
there."

He had dropped again into the new form of master and man.  His voice was
cadenced, gentlemanly.  Jacques pointed to his own saddle-bag.

"No, no, they are not the things needed.  I want the evening-dress which
cost that cool hundred dollars in New York."

Still Jacques was silent.  He did not know whether, in his new position,
he was expected to suggest.  Belward understood, and it pleased him.

"If we had lost the track of a buck moose, or were nosing a cache of
furs, you'd find a way, Brillon."

"Voila," said Jacques; "then, why not wear the buckskin vest, the red-
silk sash, and the boots like these?"--tapping his own leathers.  "You
look a grand seigneur so."

"But I am here to look an English gentleman, not a grand seigneur, nor a
company's trader on a break.  Never mind, the thing will wait till we
stand in my ancestral halls," he added, with a dry laugh.

They neared the Court.  The village church was close by the Court-wall.
It drew Belward's attention.  One by one lights were springing up in it.
It was a Friday evening, and the choir were come to practise.  They saw
buxom village girls stroll in, followed by the organist, one or two young
men and a handful of boys.  Presently the horsemen were seen, and a
staring group gathered at the church door.  An idea came to Belward.

"Kings used to make pilgrimages before they took their crowns, why
shouldn't I?" he said half-jestingly.  Most men placed similarly would
have been so engaged with the main event that they had never thought of
this other.  But Belward was not excited.  He was moving deliberately,
prepared for every situation.  He had a great game in hand, and he had no
fear of his ability to play it.  He suddenly stopped his horse, and threw
the bridle to Jacques, saying:

"I'll be back directly, Brillon."

He entered the churchyard, and passed to the door.  As he came the group
under the crumbling arch fell back, and at the call of the organist went
to the chancel.  Belward came slowly up the aisle, and paused about the
middle.  Something in the scene gave him a new sensation.  The church was
old, dilapidated; but the timbered roof, the Norman and Early English
arches incongruously side by side, with patches of ancient distemper and
paintings, and, more than all, the marble figures on the tombs, with
hands folded so foolishly,--yet impressively too, brought him up with a
quick throb of the heart.  It was his first real contact with England;
for he had not seen London, save at Euston Station and in the north-west
district.  But here he was in touch with his heritage.  He rested his
hand upon a tomb beside him, and looked around slowly.

The choir began the psalm for the following Sunday.  At first he did not
listen; but presently the organist was heard alone, and then the choir
afterwards sang:

    "Woe is me, that I am constrained to dwell with Mesech:
     And to have my habitation among the tents of Kedar."

Simple, dusty, ancient church, thick with effigies and tombs; with
inscriptions upon pillars to virgins departed this life; and tablets
telling of gentlemen gone from great parochial virtues: it wakened in
Belward's brain a fresh conception of the life he was about to live--he
did not doubt that he would live it.  He would not think of himself as
inacceptable to old Sir William Belward.  He glanced to the tomb under
his hand.  There was enough daylight yet to see the inscription on the
marble.  Besides, a single candle was burning just over his head.  He
stooped and read:

                         SACRED TO THE MEMORY
                                   OF
                   SIR GASTON ROBERT BELWARD, BART.,
            OF RIDLEY COURT, IN THIS PARISH OF GASTONBURY,
                                 WHO,
                  AT THE AGE OF ONE AND FIFTY YEARS,
          AFTER A LIFE OF DISTINGUISHED SERVICE FOR HIS KING
                             AND COUNTRY,
          AND GRAVE AND CONSTANT CARE OF THOSE EXALTED WORKS
                 WHICH BECAME A GENTLEMAN OF ENGLAND;
            MOST NOTABLE FOR HIS LOVE OF ARTS AND LETTERS;
              SENSIBLE IN ALL GRACES AND ACCOMPLISHMENTS;
             GIFTED WITH SINGULAR VIRTUES AND INTELLECTS;
                                  AND
                DELIGHTING AS MUCH IN THE JOYS OF PEACE
                    AS IN THE HEAVY DUTIES OF WAR:
             WAS SLAIN BY THE SIDE OF HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS,
              THE BELOVED AND ILLUSTRIOUS PRINCE RUPERT,
                       AT THE BATTLE OF NASEBY,
                    IN THE YEAR OF OUR LORD MDCXLV.

                 "A Sojourner as all my Fathers were."

"'Gaston Robert Belward'!"

He read the name over and over, his fingers tracing the letters.

His first glance at the recumbent figure had been hasty.  Now, however,
he leaned over and examined it.  It lay, hands folded, in the dress of
Prince Rupert's cavaliers, a sword at side, and great spurs laid beside
the heels.

"'Gaston Robert Belward'!"

As this other Gaston Robert Belward looked at the image of his dead
ancestor, a wild thought came: Had he himself not fought with Prince
Rupert?  Was he not looking at himself in stone?  Was he not here to show
England how a knight of Charles's time would look upon the life of the
Victorian age?  Would not this still cold Gaston be as strange at Ridley
Court as himself fresh from tightening a cinch on the belly of a broncho?
Would he not ride from where he had been sojourning as much a stranger in
his England as himself?

For a moment the idea possessed him.  He was Sir Gaston Robert Belward,
Baronet.  He remembered now how, at Prince Rupert's side, he had sped on
after Ireton's horse, cutting down Roundheads as he passed, on and on,
mad with conquest, yet wondering that Rupert kept so long in pursuit
while Charles was in danger with Cromwell: how, as the word came to wheel
back, a shot tore away the pommel of his saddle; then another, and
another, and with a sharp twinge in his neck he fell from his horse.  He
remembered how he raised himself on his arm and shouted "God save the
King!"  How he loosed his scarf and stanched the blood at his neck, then
fell back into a whirring silence, from which he was roused by feeling
himself in strong arms, and hearing a voice say: "Courage, Gaston."  Then
came the distant, very distant, thud of hoofs, and he fell asleep; and
memory was done.

He stood for a moment oblivious to everything: the evening bird
fluttering among the rafters, the song of the nightingale without, the
sighing wind in the tower entry, the rustics in the doorway, the group in
the choir.  Presently he became conscious of the words sung:

                   "A thousand ages in Thy sight
                    Are like an evening gone;
                    Short as the watch that ends the night
                    Before the rising sun.

                   "Time, like an ever-rolling stream,
                    Bears all its sons away;
                    They fly, forgotten, as a dream
                    Dies at the opening day."

He was himself again in an instant.  He had been in a kind of dream.  It
seemed a long time since he had entered the church--in reality but a few
moments.  He caught his moustache in his fingers, and turned on his heel
with a musing smile.  His spurs clinked as he went down the aisle; and,
involuntarily, he tapped a boot-leg with his riding-whip.  The singing
ceased.  His spurs made the only sound.  The rustics at the door fell
back before him.  He had to go up three steps to reach the threshold.  As
he stood on the top one he paused and turned round.

So, this was home: this church more so even than the Court hard by.
Here his ancestors--for how long he did not know, probably since the time
of Edward III--idled time away in the dust; here Gaston Belward had been
sleeping in effigy since Naseby Field.  A romantic light came into his
face.  Again, why not?  Even in the Hudson's Bay country and in the Rocky
Mountains, he had been called, "Tivi, The Man of the Other."  He had been
counted the greatest of Medicine Men--one of the Race: the people of the
Pole, who lived in a pleasant land, gifted as none others of the race of
men.  Not an hour before Jacques had asked him where he got "the other."
No man can live in the North for any time without getting the strain
of its mystery and romance in him.  Gaston waved his hand to the tomb,
and said half-believingly:

"Gaston Robert Belward, come again to your kingdom."

He turned to go out, and faced the rector of the parish,--a bent, benign-
looking man,--who gazed at him astonished.  He had heard the strange
speech.  His grave eyes rested on the stalwart stranger with courteous
inquiry.  Gaston knew who it was.  Over his left brow there was a scar.
He had heard of that scar before.  When the venerable Archdeacon Varcoe
was tutor to Ian and Robert Belward, Ian, in a fit of anger, had thrown a
stick at his brother.  It had struck the clergyman, leaving a scar.

Gaston now raised his hat.  As he passed, the rector looked after him,
puzzled; the words he had heard addressed to the effigy returning.  His
eyes followed the young man to the gate, and presently, with a quick
lifting of the shoulders, he said:

"Robert Belward!"  Then added: "Impossible!  But he is a Belward."

He saw Gaston mount, then entered and went slowly up the aisle.  He
paused beside the tomb of that other Belward.  His wrinkled hand rested
on it.

"That is it," he said at last.  "He is like the picture of this Sir
Gaston.  Strange."

He sighed, and unconsciously touched the scar on his brow.  His dealings
with the Belwards had not been all joy.  Begun with youthful pride and
affectionate interest, they had gone on into vexation, sorrow, failure,
and shame.  While Gaston was riding into his kingdom, Lionel Henry Varcoe
was thinking how poor his life had been where he had meant it to be
useful.  As he stood musing and listening to the music of the choir,
a girl came softly up the aisle, and touched him on the arm.

"Grandfather, dear," she said, "aren't you going to the Court?  You have
a standing invitation for this night in the week.  You have not been
there for so long."

He fondled the hand on his arm.

"My dearest, they have not asked me for a long time."

"But why not to-night?  I have laid out everything nicely for you--your
new gaiters, and your D. C. L.  coat with the pretty buttons and cord."

"How can I leave you, my dear?  And they do not ask you!"

The voice tried for playfulness, but the eyes had a disturbed look.

"Me?  Oh! they never ask me to dinner-you know that.  Tea and formal
visits are enough for Lady Belward, and almost too much for me.  There is
yet time to dress.  Do say you will go.  I want you to be friendly with
them."

The old man shook his head.

"I do not care to leave you, my dearest."

"Foolish old fatherkins!  Who would carry me off?--'Nobody, no, not I,
nobody cares for me.'"  Suddenly a new look shot up in her face.

"Did you see that singular handsome man who came from the church--like
some one out of an old painting?  Not that his dress was so strange; but
there was something in his face--something that you would expect to find
in--in a Garibaldi.  Silly, am I not?  Did you see him?"

He looked at her gravely.

"My dear," he said at last, "I think I will go after all, though I shall
be a little late."

"A sensible grandfather.  Come quickly, dear."  He paused again.

"But I fear I sent a note to say I could not dine."

"No, you did not.  It has been lying on your table for two days."

"Dear me--dear me!  I am getting very old."

They passed out of the church.  Presently, as they hurried to the rectory
near by, the girl said:

"But you haven't answered.  Did you see the stranger?  Do you know who he
is?"

The rector turned, and pointed to the gate of Ridley Court.  Gaston and
Brillon were just entering.  "Alice," he said, in a vague, half-troubled
way, "the man is a Belward, I think."

"Why, of course!" the girl replied with a flash of excitement.  "But
he's so dark, and foreign-looking!  What Belward is he?"

"I do not know yet, my dear."

"I shall be up when you come back.  But mind, don't leave just after
dinner.  Stay and talk; you must tell me everything that's said and done
--and about the stranger."




CHAPTER II

IN WHICH HE CLAIMS HIS OWN

Meanwhile, without a word, Gaston had mounted, ridden to the castle,
and passed through the open gates into the court-yard.  Inside he paused.
In the main building many lights were burning.  There came a rattle of
wheels behind him, and he shifted to let a carriage pass.  Through the
window of the brougham he could see the shimmer of satin, lace, and soft
white fur, and he had an instant's glance of a pretty face.

The carriage drew up to the steps, and presently three ladies and a
brusque gentleman passed into the hall-way, admitted by powdered footmen.
The incident had a manner, an air, which struck Gaston, he knew not why.
Perhaps it was the easy finesse of ceremonial.  He looked at Brillon.  He
had seen him sit arms folded like that, looking from the top of a bluff
down on an Indian village or a herd of buffaloes.  There was wonder, but
no shyness or agitation, on his face; rather the naive, naked look of a
child.  Belward laughed.

"Come, Brillon; we are at home."

He rode up to the steps, Jacques following.  A foot man appeared and
stared.  Gaston looked down on him neutrally, and dismounted.  Jacques
did the same.  The footman still stared.  Another appeared behind.
Gaston eyed the puzzled servant calmly.

"Why don't you call a groom?" he presently said.  There was a cold gleam
in his eye.

The footman shrank.

"Yessir, yessir," he said confusedly, and signalled.  The other footman
came down, and made as if to take the bridle.  Gaston waved him back.
None too soon, for the horse lunged at him.

"A rub down, a pint of beer, and water and feed in an hour, and I'll come
to see him myself late to-night."  Jacques had loosened the saddle-bags
and taken them off.  Gaston spoke to the horse, patted his neck, and gave
him to the groom.  Then he went up the steps, followed by Jacques.  He
turned at the door to see the groom leading both horses off, and eyeing
Saracen suspiciously.  He laughed noiselessly.

"Saracen 'll teach him things," he said.  "I might warn him, but it's
best for the horses to make their own impressions."

"What name, sir?" asked a footman.

"You are--?"

"Falby, Sir."

"Falby, look after my man Brillon here, and take me to Sir William."

"What name, sir?"

Gaston, as if with sudden thought, stepped into the light of the candles,
and said in a low voice: "Falby, don't you know me?"

The footman turned a little pale, as his eyes, in spite of themselves,
clung to Gaston's.  A kind of fright came, and then they steadied.

"Oh yes, sir," he said mechanically.

"Where have you seen me?"

"In the picture on the wall, sir."

"Whose picture, Falby?"

"Sir Gaston Belward, Sir."

A smile lurked at the corners of Gaston's mouth.

"Gaston Belward.  Very well, then you know what to say to Sir William.
Show me into the library."

"Or the justices' room, sir?"

"The justices' room will do."

Gaston wondered what the justices' room was.  A moment after he stood in
it, and the dazed Falby had gone, trying vainly to reconcile the picture
on the wall, which, now that he could think, he knew was very old, with
this strange man who had sent a curious cold shiver through him.  But,
anyhow, he was a Belward, that was certain: voice, face, manner showed
it.  But with something like no Belward he had ever seen.  Left to
himself, Gaston looked round on a large, severe room.  Its use dawned on
him.  This was part of the life: Sir William was a Justice of the Peace.
But why had he been brought here?  Why not to the library as himself had
suggested?  There would be some awkward hours for Falby in the future.
Gaston had as winning a smile, as sweet a manner, as any one in the
world, so long as a straight game was on; but to cross his will with the
other--he had been too long a power in that wild country where his father
had also been a power!  He did not quite know how long he waited, for he
was busy with plans as to his career at Ridley Court.  He was roused at
last by Falby's entrance.  A keen, cold look shot from under his straight
brows.

"Well?" he asked.

"Will you step into the library, sir?  Sir William will see you there."

Falby tried to avoid his look, but his eyes were compelled, and Gaston
said:

"Falby, you will always hate to enter this room."  Falby was agitated.

"I hope not, sir."

"But you will, Falby, unless--"

"Yessir?"

"Unless you are both the serpent and the dove, Falby."

"Yessir."

As they entered the hall, Brillon with the saddle-bags was being taken in
charge, and Gaston saw what a strange figure he looked beside the other
servants and in these fine surroundings.  He could not think that himself
was so bizarre.  Nor was he.  But he looked unusual; as one of high
civilisation might, through long absence in primitive countries, return
in uncommon clothing, and with a manner of distinguished strangeness: the
barbaric to protect the refined, as one has seen a bush of firs set to
shelter a wheat-field from a seawind, or a wind-mill water cunningly-
begotten flowers.

As he went through the hall other visitors were entering.  They passed
him, making for the staircase.  Ladies with the grand air looked at him
curiously, and two girls glanced shyly from the jingling spurs and
tasselled boots to his rare face.

One of the ladies suddenly gave a little gasping cry, and catching the
arm of her companion, said:

"Reine, how like Robert Belward!  Who--who is he?"

The other coolly put up her pince-nez.  She caught Gaston's profile and
the turn of his shoulder.

"Yes, like, Sophie; but Robert never had such a back, nor anything like
the face."

She spoke with no attempt to modulate her voice, and it carried
distinctly to Gaston.  He turned and glanced at them.

"He's a Belward, certainly, but like what one I don't know; and he's
terribly eccentric, my dear!  Did you see the boots and the sash?  Why,
bless me, if you are not shaking!  Don't be silly--shivering at the
thought of Robert Belward after all these years."

So saying, Mrs. Warren Gasgoyne tapped Lady Dargan on the arm, and then
turned sharply to see if her daughters had been listening.  She saw that
they had; and though herself and not her sister was to blame, she said:

"Sophie, you are very indiscreet!  If you had daughters of your own, you
would probably be more careful--though Heaven only knows, for you were
always difficult!"

With this they vanished up the staircase, Mrs. Gasgoyne's daughters,
Delia and Agatha, smiling at each other and whispering about Gaston.

Meanwhile the seeker after a kingdom was shown into Sir William Belward's
study.  No one was there.  He walked to the mantelpiece, and, leaning his
arm on it, looked round.  Directly in front of him on the wall was the
picture of a lady in middle-life, sitting in an arbour.  A crutch lay
against one arm of her chair, and her left hand leaned on an ebony
silver-topped cane.  There was something painful, haunting, in the face
--a weirdness in the whole picture.  The face was looking into the
sunlight, but the effect was rather of moonlight--distant, mournful.  He
was fascinated; why, he could not tell.  Art to him was an unknown book,
but he had the instinct, and he was quick to feel.  This picture struck
him as being out of harmony with everything else in the room.  Yet it
had, a strange compelling charm.

Presently he started forward with an exclamation.  Now he understood the
vague, eerie influence.  Looking out from behind the foliage was a face,
so dim that one moment it seemed not to be there, and then suddenly to
flash in--as a picture from beyond sails, lightning-like, across the
filmy eyes of the dying.  It was the face of a youth, elf-like, unreal,
yet he saw his father's features in it.

He rubbed his eyes and looked again.  It seemed very dim.  Indeed, so
delicately, vaguely, had the work been done that only eyes like Gaston's,
trained to observe, with the sight of a hawk and a sense of the
mysterious, could have seen so quickly or so distinctly.  He drew slowly
back to the mantel again, and mused.  What did it mean?  He was sure that
the woman was his grandmother.

At that moment the door opened, and an alert, white-haired man stepped in
quickly, and stopped in the centre of the room, looking at his visitor.
His deep, keen eyes gazed out with an intensity that might almost be
fierceness, and the fingers of his fine hands opened and shut nervously.
Though of no great stature, he had singular dignity.  He was in evening-
dress, and as he raised a hand to his chin quickly, as if in surprise or
perplexity, Gaston noticed that he wore a large seal-ring.  It is
singular that while he was engaged with his great event, he was also
thinking what an air of authority the ring gave.

For a moment the two men stood at gaze without speaking, though Gaston
stepped forward respectfully.  A bewildered, almost shrinking look came
into Sir William's eyes, as the other stood full in the light of the
candles.

Presently the old man spoke.  In spite of conventional smoothness, his
voice had the ring of distance, which comes from having lived through and
above painful things.

"My servant announced you as Sir Gaston Belward.  There is some mistake?"

"There is a mistake," was the slow reply.  "I did not give my name as Sir
Gaston Belward.  That was Falby's conclusion, sir.  But I am Gaston
Robert Belward, just the same."

Sir William was dazed, puzzled.  He presently made a quick gesture, as if
driving away some foolish thought, and, motioning to a chair, said:

"Will you be seated?"

They both sat, Sir William by his writing-table.  His look was now steady
and penetrating, but he met one just as firm.

"You are--Gaston Robert Belward?  May I ask for further information?"

There was furtive humour playing at Gaston's mouth.  The old man's manner
had been so unlike anything he had ever met, save, to an extent, in his
father, that it interested him.  He replied, with keen distinctness:
"You mean, why I have come--home?"

Sir William's fingers trembled on a paper-knife.  "Are you-at home?"

"I have come home to ask for my heritage--with interest compounded, sir."

Sir William was now very pale.  He got to his feet, came to the young
man, peered into his face, then drew back to the table and steadied
himself against it.  Gaston rose also: his instinct of courtesy was
acute--absurdly civilised--that is, primitive.  He waited.  "You are
Robert's son?"

"Robert Belward was my father."

"Your father is dead?"

"Twelve years ago."

Sir William sank back in his chair.  His thin fingers ran back and forth
along his lips.  Presently he took out his handkerchief and coughed into
it nervously.  His lips trembled.  With a preoccupied air he arranged a
handful of papers on the table.

"Why did you not come before?" he asked at last, in a low, mechanical
voice.

"It was better for a man than a boy to come."

"May I ask why?"

"A boy doesn't always see a situation--gives up too soon--throws away his
rights.  My father was a boy."

"He was twenty-five when he went away."

"I am fifty!"

Sir William looked up sharply, perplexed.  "Fifty?"

"He only knew this life: I know the world."

"What world?"

"The great North, the South, the seas at four corners of the earth."

Sir William glanced at the top-boots, the peeping sash, the strong,
bronzed face.

"Who was your mother?" he asked abruptly.

"A woman of France."

The baronet made a gesture of impatience, and looked searchingly at the
young man.

All at once Gaston shot his bolt, to have it over.  "She had Indian blood
also."

He stretched himself to his full height, easily, broadly, with a touch of
defiance, and leaned an arm against the mantel, awaiting Sir William's
reply.

The old man shrank, then said coldly: "Have you the marriage-
certificate?"

Gaston drew some papers from his pockets.

"Here, sir, with a letter from my father, and one from the Hudson's Bay
Company."

His grandfather took them.  With an effort he steadied himself, then
opened and read them one by one, his son's brief letter last--it was
merely a calm farewell, with a request that justice should be done his
son.

At that moment Falby entered and said:

"Her ladyship's compliments, and all the guests have arrived, sir."

"My compliments to her ladyship, and ask her to give me five minutes yet,
Falby."

Turning to his grandson, there seemed to be a moment's hesitation, then
he reached out his hand.

"You have brought your luggage?  Will you care to dine with us?"

Gaston took the cold outstretched fingers.

"Only my saddle-bag, and I have no evening-dress with me, else I should
be glad."

There was another glance up and down the athletic figure, a half-
apprehensive smile as the baronet thought of his wife, and then he said:

"We must see if anything can be done."

He pulled a bell-cord.  A servant appeared.

"Ask the housekeeper to come for a moment, please."  Neither spoke till
the housekeeper appeared.  "Hovey," he said to the grim woman, "give Mr.
Gaston the room in the north tower.  Then, from the press in the same
room lay out the evening-dress which you will find there....  They were
your father's," he added, turning to the young man.  "It was my wife's
wish to keep them.  Have they been aired lately, Hovey?"

"Some days ago, sir."

"That will do."  The housekeeper left, agitated.  You will probably be in
time for the fish," he added, as he bowed to Robert.

"If the clothes do not fit, sir?"

"Your father was about your height and nearly as large, and fashions have
not changed much."

A few moments afterwards Gaston was in the room which his father had
occupied twenty-seven years before.  The taciturn housekeeper, eyeing him
excitedly the while, put out the clothes.  He did not say anything till
she was about to go.  Then:

"Hovey, were you here in my father's time?"

"I was under-parlourmaid, sir," she said.

"And you are housekeeper now--good!"

The face of the woman crimsoned, hiding her dour wrinkles.  She turned
away her head.

"I'd have given my right hand if he hadn't gone, sir."

Gaston whistled softly, then:

"So would he, I fancy, before he died.  But I shall not go, so you will
not need to risk a finger for me.  I am going to stay, Hovey.  Good-
night.  Look after Brillon, please."

He held out his hand.  Her fingers twitched in his, then grasped them
nervously.

"Yes, sir.  Good-night, Sir.  It's--it's like him comin' back, sir."

Then she suddenly turned and hurried from the room, a blunt figure to
whom emotion was not graceful.  "H'm!" said Gaston, as he shut the door.
"Parlourmaid then, eh?  History at every turn!  'Voici le sabre de mon
pere!'"




CHAPTER III

HE TELLS THE STORY OF HIS LIFE

Gaston Belward was not sentimental: that belongs to the middle-class
Englishman's ideal of civilisation.  But he had a civilisation akin to
the highest; incongruous, therefore, to the general as the sympathy
between the United States and Russia.  The highest civilisation can be
independent.  The English aristocrat is at home in the lodge of a Sioux
chief or the bamboo-hut of a Fijian, and makes brothers of "savages,"
when those other formal folk, who spend their lives in keeping their
dignity, would be lofty and superior.

When Gaston looked at his father's clothes and turned them over,
he had a twinge of honest emotion; but his mind was on the dinner and
his heritage, and he only said, as he frowned at the tightness of the
waistband:

"Never mind, we'll make 'em pay, shot and wadding, for what you lost,
Robert Belward; and wherever you are, I hope you'll see it."

In twelve minutes from the time he entered the bedroom he was ready.
He pulled the bell-cord, and then passed out.  A servant met him on the
stairs, and in another minute he was inside the dining-room.  Sir
William's eyes flashed up.  There was smouldering excitement in his face,
but one could not have guessed at anything unusual.  A seat had been
placed for Gaston beside him.  The situation was singular and trying.
It would have been easier if he had merely come into the drawing-room
after dinner.  This was in Sir William's mind when he asked him to dine;
but it was as it was.  Gaston's alert glance found the empty seat.  He
was about to make towards it, but he caught Sir William's eye and saw it
signal him to the end of the table near him.  His brain was working with
celerity and clearness.  He now saw the woman whose portrait had so
fascinated him in the library.  As his eyes fastened on her here, he
almost fancied he could see the boy's--his father's-face looking over
her shoulder.

He instantly went to her, and said: "I am sorry to be late."

His first impulse had been to offer his hand, as, naturally, he would
have done in "barbaric" lands, but the instinct of this other
civilisation was at work in him.  He might have been a polite casual
guest, and not a grandson, bringing the remembrance, the culmination of
twenty-seven years' tragedy into a home; she might have been a hostess
with whom he wished to be on terms: that was all.

If the situation was trying for him, it was painful for her.  She had had
only a whispered announcement before Sir William led the way to dinner.
Yet she was now all her husband had been, and more.  Repression had been
her practice for unnumbered years, and the only heralds of her feelings
were the restless wells of her dark eyes: the physical and mental misery
she had endured lay hid under the pale composure of her face.  She was
now brought suddenly before the composite image of her past.  Yet she
merely lifted a slender hand with long, fine fingers, which, as they
clasped his, all at once trembled, and then pressed them hotly,
nervously.  To his surprise, it sent a twinge of colour to his cheek.
"It was good of you to come down after such a journey," she said.
Nothing more.

Then he passed on, and sat down to Sir William's courteous gesture.  The
situation had its difficulties for the guests--perfect guests as they
were.  Every one was aware of a dramatic incident, for which there had
been no preparation save Sir William's remark that a grandson had arrived
from the North Pole or thereabouts; and to continue conversation and
appear casual put their resources to some test.  But they stood it well,
though.  their eyes were busy, and the talk was cheerfully mechanical.
So occupied were they with Gaston's entrance, that they did not know
how near Lady Dargan came to fainting.

At the button-hole of the coat worn by Gaston hung a tiny piece of red
ribbon which she had drawn from her sleeve on the terrace twenty-seven
years ago, and tied there with the words:

"Do you think you will wear it till we meet again?"  And the man had
replied:

"You'll not see me without it, pretty girl--pretty girl."

A woman is not so unaccountable after all.  She has more imagination than
a man; she has not many resources to console her for disappointments, and
she prizes to her last hour the swift moments when wonderful things
seemed possible.  That man is foolish who shows himself jealous of a
woman's memories or tokens--those guarantees of her womanliness.

When Lady Dargan saw the ribbon, which Gaston in his hurry had not
disturbed, tied exactly as she had tied it, a weird feeling came to her,
and she felt choking.  But her sister's eyes were on her, and Mrs.
Gasgoyne's voice came across the table clearly:

"Sophie, what were Fred Bideford's colours at Sandown?  You always
remember that kind of thing."  The warning was sufficient.  Lady Dargan
could make no effort of memory, but she replied without hesitation--or
conscience:

"Yellow and brown."

"There," said Mrs. Gasgoyne, "we are both wrong, Captain Maudsley.
Sophie never makes a mistake."  Maudsley assented politely, but, stealing
a look at Lady Dargan, wondered what the little by-play meant.  Gaston
was between Sir William and Mrs. Gasgoyne.  He declined soup and fish,
which had just been served, because he wished for time to get his
bearings.  He glanced at the menu as if idly interested, conscious that
he was under observation.  He felt that he had, some how, the situation
in his hands.  Everything had gone well, and he knew that his part had
been played with some aplomb--natural, instinctive.  Unlike most large
men, he had a mind always alert, not requiring the inspiration of unusual
moments.  What struck him most forcibly now was the tasteful courtesy
which had made his entrance easy.  He instinctively compared it to the
courtesy in the lodge of an Indian chief, or of a Hudson's Bay factor who
has not seen the outer world for half a century.  It was so different,
and yet it was much the same.  He had seen a missionary, a layreader,
come intoxicated into a council of chiefs.  The chiefs did not show that
they knew his condition till he forced them to do so.  Then two of the
young men rose, suddenly pinned him in their arms, carried him out, and
tied him in a lodge.  The next morning they sent him out of their
country.  Gaston was no philosopher, but he could place a thing when he
saw it: which is a kind of genius.

Presently Sir William said quietly:

"Mrs. Gasgoyne, you knew Robert well; his son ought to know you."

Gaston turned to Mrs. Gasgoyne, and said in his father's manner as much
as possible, for now his mind ran back to how his father talked and
acted, forming a standard for him:

"My father once told me a tale of the Keithley Hunt--something 'away up,'
as they say in the West--and a Mrs. Warren Gasgoyne was in it."

He made an instant friend of Mrs. Gasgoyne--made her so purposely.
This was one of the few things from his father's talks upon his past
life.  He remembered the story because it was interesting, the name
because it had a sound.

She flushed with pleasure.  That story of the Hunt was one of her
sweetest recollections.  For her bravery then she had been voted by the
field "a good fellow," and an admiral present declared that she had a
head "as long as the maintop bow-line."  She loved admiration, though she
had no foolish sentiment; she called men silly creatures, and yet would
go on her knees across country to do a deserving man-friend a service.
She was fifty and over, yet she had the springing heart of a girl--mostly
hid behind a brusque manner and a blunt, kindly tongue.

"Your father could always tell a good story," she said.

"He told me one of you: what about telling me one of him?"

Adaptable, he had at once fallen in with her direct speech; the more so
because it was his natural way; any other ways were "games," as he
himself said.

She flashed a glance at her sister, and smiled half-ironically.

"I could tell you plenty," she said softly.  "He was a startling fellow,
and went far sometimes; but you look as if you could go farther."

Gaston helped himself to an entree, wondering whether a knife was used
with sweetbreads.

"How far could he go?" he asked.

"In the hunting-field with anybody, with women endlessly, with meanness
like a snail, and when his blood was up, to the most nonsensical place
you can think of."

Forks only for sweetbreads!  Gaston picked one up.  "He went there."

"Who told you?"

"I came from there."

"Where is it?"

"A few hundred miles from the Arctic circle."

"Oh, I didn't think it was that climate!"

"It never is till you arrive.  You are always out in the cold there."

"That sounds American."

"Every man is a sinner one way or another."

"You are very clever--cleverer than your father ever was.

"I hope so."

"Why?"

"He went--there.  I've come--from there."

"And you think you will stay--never go back?"

"He was out of it for twenty years, and died.  If I am in it for that
long, I shall have had enough."

Their eyes met.  The woman looked at him steadily.  "You won't be," she
replied, this time seriously, and in a very low voice.

"No?  Why?"

"Because you will tire of it all--though you've started very well."

She then answered a question of Captain Maudsley's and turned again to
Gaston.

"What will make me tire of it?" he inquired.  She sipped her champagne
musingly.

"Why, what is in you deeper than all this; with the help of some woman
probably."

She looked at him searchingly, then added:

"You seem strangely like and yet unlike your father to-night."

"I am wearing his clothes," he said.

She had plenty of nerve, but this startled her.  She shrank a little: it
seemed uncanny.  Now she remembered that ribbon in the button-hole.

"Poor Sophie!" she thought.  "And this one will make greater mischief
here."  Then, aloud to him: "Your father was a good fellow, but he did
wild things."

"I do not see the connection," he answered.  "I am not a good man, and I
shall do wilder things--is that it?"

"You will do mad things," she replied hardly above a whisper, and talked
once more with Captain Maudsley.  Gaston now turned to his grandfather,
who had heard a sentence here and there, and felt that the young man
carried off the situation well enough.  He then began to talk in a
general way about Gaston's voyage, of the Hudson's Bay Company, and
expeditions to the Arctic, drawing Lady Dargan into the conversation.

Whatever might be said of Sir William Belward he was an excellent host.
He had a cool, unmalicious wit, but that man was unwise who offered
himself to its severity.  To-night he surpassed himself in suggestive
talk, until, all at once, seeing Lady Dargan's eyes fixed on Gaston,
he went silent, sitting back in his chair abstracted.  Soon, however,
a warning glance from his wife brought him back and saved Lady Dargan
from collapse; for it seemed impossible to talk alone to this ghost of
her past.

At this moment Gaston heard a voice near:

"As like as if he'd stepped out of the picture, if it weren't for the
clothes.  A Gaston too!"

The speaker was Lord Dargan.  He was talking to Archdeacon Varcoe.

Gaston followed Lord Dargan's glance to the portrait of that Sir Gaston
Belward whose effigy he had seen.  He found himself in form, feature,
expression; the bold vigilance of eye, the primitive activity of
shoulder, the small firm foot, the nervous power of the hand.  The eyes
seemed looking at him.  He answered to the look.  There was in him the
romantic strain, and something more!  In the remote parts of his being
there was the capacity for the phenomenal, the strange.  Once again, as
in the church, he saw the field of Naseby, King Charles, Ireton's men,
Cromwell and his Ironsides, Prince Rupert and the swarming rush of
cavalry, and the end of it all!  Had it been a tale of his father's at
camp-fire?  Had he read it somewhere?  He felt his blood thump in his
veins.  Another half-hour, wherein he was learning every minute, nothing
escaping him, everything interesting him; his grandfather and Mrs.
Gasgoyne especially, then the ladies retired slowly with their crippled
hostess, who gave Gaston, as she rose, a look almost painfully intense.
It haunted him.

Now Gaston had his chance.  He had no fear of what he could do with men:
he had measured himself a few times with English gentlemen as he
travelled, and he knew where his power lay--not in making himself
agreeable, but in imposing his personality.

The guests were not soon to forget the talk of that hour.  It played into
Gaston's hands.  He pretended to nothing; he confessed ignorance here and
there with great simplicity; but he had the gift of reducing things, as
it were, to their original elements.  He cut away to the core of a
matter, and having simple, fixed ideas, he was able to focus the talk,
which had begun with hunting stories, and ended with the morality of
duelling.  Gaston's hunting stories had made them breathless, his views
upon duelling did not free their lungs.

There were sentimentalists present; others who, because it had become
etiquette not to cross swords, thought it indecent.  Archdeacon Varcoe
would not be drawn into discussion, but sipped his wine, listened, and
watched Gaston.

The young man measured his grandfather's mind, and he drove home his
points mercilessly.

Captain Maudsley said something about "romantic murder."

"That's the trouble," Gaston said.  "I don't know who killed duelling
in England, but behind it must have been a woman or a shopkeeper:
sentimentalism, timidity, dead romance.  What is patriotism but romance?
Ideals is what they call it somewhere.  I've lived in a land full of hard
work and dangers, but also full of romance.  What is the result?  Why, a
people off there whom you pity, and who don't need pity.  Romance?  See:
you only get square justice out of a wise autocrat, not out of your
'twelve true men'; and duelling is the last decent relic of autocracy.
Suppose the wronged man does get killed; that is all right: it wasn't
merely blood he was after, but the right to hit a man in the eye for a
wrong done.  What is all this hullaballoo--about saving human life?
There's as much interest--and duty--in dying as living, if you go the
way your conscience tells you."

A couple of hours later, Gaston, after having seen to his horse, stood
alone in the drawing-room with his grandfather and grandmother.  As yet
Lady Belward had spoken not half a dozen words to him.  Sir William
presently said to him:

"Are you too tired to join us in the library?"

"I'm as fresh as paint, sir," was the reply.

Lady Belward turned without a word, and slowly passed from the room.
Gaston's eyes followed the crippled figure, which yet had a rare dignity.
He had a sudden impulse.  He stepped to her and said with an almost
boyish simplicity:

"You are very tired; let me carry you--grandmother."

He could hear Sir William gasp a little as he laid a quick warm hand on
hers that held the cane.  She looked at him gravely, sadly, and then
said:

"I will take your arm, if you please."

He took the cane, and she put a hand towards him.  He ran his strong arm
around her waist with a little humouring laugh, her hand rested on his
shoulder, and he timed his step to hers.  Sir William was in an eddy of
wonder--a strong head was "mazed."  He had looked for a different
reception of this uncommon kinsman.  How quickly had the new-comer
conquered himself!  And yet he had a slight strangeness of accent--not
American, but something which seemed unusual.  He did not reckon with a
voice which, under cover of easy deliberation, had a convincing quality;
with a manner of old-fashioned courtesy and stateliness.  As Mrs.
Gasgoyne had said to the rector, whose eyes had followed Gaston
everywhere in the drawing-room:

"My dear archdeacon, where did he get it?  Why, he has lived most of his
life with savages!"

"Vandyke might have painted the man," Lord Dargan had added.

"Vandyke did paint him," had put in Delia Gasgoyne from behind her
mother.

"How do you mean, Delia?" Mrs. Gasgoyne had added, looking curiously at
her.

"His picture hangs in the dining-room."

Then the picture had been discussed, and the girl's eyes had followed
Gaston--followed him until he had caught their glance.  Without an
introduction, he had come and dropped into conversation with her, till
her mother cleverly interrupted.

Inside the library Lady Belward was comfortably placed, and looking up at
Gaston, said:

"You have your father's ways: I hope that you will be wiser."

"If you will teach me!" he answered gently.

There came two little bright spots on her cheeks, and her hands clasped
in her lap.  They all sat down.  Sir William spoke:

"It is much to ask that you should tell us of your life now, but it is
better that we should start with some knowledge of each other."

At that moment Gaston's eyes caught the strange picture on the wall.

"I understand," he answered.  "But I would be starting in the middle of a
story."

"You mean that you wish to hear your father's history?  Did he not tell
you?"

"Trifles--that is all."

"Did he ever speak of me?" asked Lady Belward with low anxiety.

"Yes, when he was dying."

"What did he say?"

"He said: 'Tell my mother that Truth waits long, but whips hard.  Tell
her that I always loved her.'"  She shrank in her chair as if from a
blow, and then was white and motionless.

"Let us hear your story," Sir William said with a sort of hauteur.
"You know your own, much of your father's lies buried with him."

"Very well, sir."

Sir William drew a chair up beside his wife.  Gaston sat back, and for a
moment did not speak.  He was looking into distance.  Presently the blue
of his eyes went all black, and with strange unwavering concentration he
gazed straight before him.  A light spread over his face, his hands felt
for the chair-arms and held them firmly.  He began:

"I first remember swinging in a blanket from a pine-tree at a buffalo-
hunt while my mother cooked the dinner.  There were scores of tents,
horses, and many Indians and half-breeds, and a few white men.  My father
was in command.  I can see my mother's face as she stood over the fire.
It was not darker than mine; she always seemed more French than Indian,
and she was thought comely."

Lady Belward shuddered a little, but Gaston did not notice.

"I can remember the great buffalo-hunt.  You heard a heavy rumbling
sound; you saw a cloud on the prairie.  It heaved, a steam came from it,
and sometimes you caught the flash of ten thousand eyes as the beasts
tossed their heads and then bent them again to the ground and rolled on,
five hundred men after them, our women shouting and laughing, and arrows
and bullets flying.  .  .  .  I can remember a time also when a great
Indian battle happened just outside the fort, and, with my mother crying
after him, my father went out with a priest to stop it.  My father was
wounded, and then the priest frightened them, and they gathered their
dead together and buried them.  We lived in a fort for a long time, and
my mother died there.  She was a good woman, and she loved my father.
I have seen her on her knees for hours praying when he was away.--I have
her rosary now.  They called her Ste. Heloise.  Afterwards I was always
with my father.  He was a good man, but he was never happy; and only at
the last would he listen to the priest, though they were always great
friends.  He was not a Catholic of course, but he said that didn't
matter."

Sir William interrupted huskily.  "Why did he never come back?"

"I do not know quite, but he said to me once, 'Gaston, you'll tell them
of me some day, and it will be a soft pillow for their heads!  You can
mend a broken life, but the ring of it is gone.'  I think he meant to
come back when I was about fourteen; but things happened, and he stayed."

There was a pause.  Gaston seemed brooding, and Lady Belward said:

"Go on, please."

"There isn't so very much to tell.  The life was the only one I had
known, and it was all right.  But my father had told me of this life.
He taught me himself--he and Father Decluse and a Moravian missionary for
awhile.  I knew some Latin and history, a bit of mathematics, a good deal
of astronomy, some French poets, and Shakespere.  Shakespere is
wonderful.  .  .  .  My father wanted me to come here at once after he
died, but I knew better--I wanted to get sense first.  So I took a place
in the Company.  It wasn't all fun.

"I had to keep my wits sharp.  I was only a youngster, and I had to do
with men as crafty and as silly as old Polonius.  I was sent to Labrador.
That was not a life for a Christian.  Once a year a ship comes to the
port, bringing the year's mail and news from the world.  When you watch
that ship go out again, and you turn round and see the filthy Esquimaux
and Indians, and know that you've got to live for another year with them,
sit in their dirty tepees, eat their raw frozen meat, with an occasional
glut of pemmican, and the thermometer 70 degrees below zero, you get a
lump in your throat.

"Then came one winter.  I had one white man, two half-breeds, and an
Indian with me.  There was darkness day after day, and because the
Esquimaux and Indians hadn't come up to the fort that winter, it was
lonely as a tomb.  One by one the men got melancholy and then went mad,
and I had to tie them up, and care for them and feed them.  The Indian
was all right, but he got afraid, and wanted to start to a mission
station three hundred miles on.  It was a bad look-out for me, but I told
him to go.  I was left alone.  I was only twenty-one, but I was steel to
my toes--good for wear and tear.  Well, I had one solid month all alone
with my madmen.  Their jabbering made me sea-sick some times.  At last
one day I felt I'd go staring mad myself if I didn't do something
exciting to lift me, as it were.  I got a revolver, sat at the opposite
end of the room from the three lunatics, and practised shooting at them.
I had got it into my head that they ought to die, but it was only fair,
I thought, to give them a chance.  I would try hard to shoot all round
them--make a halo of bullets for the head of every one, draw them in
silhouettes of solid lead on the wall.

"I talked to them first, and told them what I was going to do.  They
seemed to understand, and didn't object.  I began with the silhouettes,
of course.  I had a box of bullets beside me.  They never squealed.  I
sent the bullets round them as pretty as the pattern of a milliner.  Then
I began with their heads.  I did two all right.  They sat and never
stirred.  But when I came to the last something happened.  It was Jock
Lawson."

Sir William interposed:

"Jock Lawson--Jock Lawson from here?"

"Yes.  His mother keeps 'The Whisk o' Barley.'"

"So, that is where Jock Lawson went?  He followed your father?"

"Yes.  Jock was mad enough when I began--clean gone.  But, somehow, the
game I was playing cured him.  'Steady, Jock!' I said.  'Steady!' for I
saw him move.  I levelled for the second bead of the halo.  My finger was
on the trigger.  'My God, don't shoot!' he called.  It startled me, my
hand shook, the thing went off, and Jock had a bullet through his brain.

".  .  .  Then I waked up.  Perhaps I had been mad myself--I don't know.
But my brain never seemed clearer than when I was playing that game.  It
was like a magnifying glass: and my eyes were so clear and strong that I
could see the pores on their skin, and the drops of sweat breaking out on
Jock's forehead when he yelled."

A low moan came from Lady Belward.  Her face was drawn and pale, but her
eyes were on Gaston with a deep fascination.  Sir William whispered to
her.

"No," she said, "I will stay."

Gaston saw the impression he had made.

"Well, I had to bury poor Jock all alone.  I don't think I should have
minded it so much, if it hadn't been for the faces of those other two
crazy men.  One of them sat still as death, his eyes following me with
one long stare, and the other kept praying all the time--he'd been a
lay preacher once before he backslided, and it came back on him now
naturally.  Now it would be from Revelation, now out of the Psalms, and
again a swingeing exhortation for the Spirit to come down and convict me
of sin.  There was a lot of sanity in it too, for he kept saying at last:
'O shut not up my soul with the sinners: nor my life with the
bloodthirsty.'  I couldn't stand it, with Jock dead there before me,
so I gave him a heavy dose of paregoric out of the Company's stores.
Before he took it he raised his finger and said to me, with a beastly
stare: 'Thou art the man!'  But the paregoric put him to sleep.  .  .  .

"Then I gave the other something to eat, and dragged Jock out to bury
him.  I remembered then that he couldn't be buried, for the ground was
too hard and the ice too thick; so I got ropes, and, when he stiffened,
slung him up into a big cedar tree, and then went up myself and arranged
the branches about him comfortably.  It seemed to me that Jock was a baby
and I was his father.  You couldn't see any blood, and I fixed his hair
so that it covered the hole in the forehead.  I remember I kissed him on
the cheek, and then said a prayer--one that I'd got out of my father's
prayer-book: 'That it may please Thee to preserve all that travel by land
or by water, all women labouring of child, all sick persons and young
children; and to show Thy pity upon all prisoners and captives.' Somehow
I had got it into my head that Jock was going on a long journey, and that
I was a prisoner and a captive."

Gaston broke off, and added presently:

"Perhaps this is all too awful to hear, but it gives you an idea of what
kind of things went to make me."  Lady Belward answered for both:

"Tell us all--everything."

"It is late," said Sir William, nervously.

"What does it matter?  It is once in a lifetime," she answered sadly.

Gaston took up the thread:

"Now I come to what will shock you even more, perhaps.  So, be prepared.
I don't know how many days went, but at last I had three visitors--in
time I should think: a Moravian missionary, and an Esquimaux and his
daughter.  I didn't tell the missionary about Jock--there was no use,
it could do no good.  They stayed four weeks, and during that time one
of the crazy men died.  The other got better, but had to be watched.  I
could do anything with him, if I got my eye on him.  Somehow, I must tell
you, I've got a lot of power that way.  I don't know where it comes from.
Well, the missionary had to go.  The old Esquimaux thought that he and
his daughter would stay on if I'd let them.  I was only too glad.  But it
wasn't wise for the missionary to take the journey alone--it was a bad
business in any case.  I urged the man that had been crazy to go, for I
thought activity would do him good.  He agreed, and the two left and got
to the Mission Station all right, after wicked trouble.  I was alone with
the Esquimaux and his daughter.  You never know why certain things
happen, and I can't tell why that winter was so weird; why the old
Esquimaux should take sick one morning, and in the evening should call
me and his daughter Lucy--she'd been given a Christian name, of course--
and say that he was going to die, and he wanted me to marry her" (Lady
Belward exclaimed, Sir William's hands fingered the chair-arm nervously)
"there and then, so that he'd know she would be cared for.  He was a
heathen, but he had been primed by the missionaries about his daughter.
She was a fine, clever girl, and well educated--the best product of their
mission.  So he called for a Bible.  There wasn't one in the place, but I
had my mother's Book of the Mass.  I went to get it, but when I set my
eyes on it, I couldn't--no, I couldn't do it, for I hadn't the least idea
but what I should bid my lady good-bye when it suited, and I didn't want
any swearing at all--not a bit.  I didn't do any.  But what happened had
to be with or without any ring or book and 'Forasmuch as.'  There had
been so much funeral and sudden death that a marriage would be a godsend
anyhow.  So the old Esquimaux got our two hands in his, babbled away in
half-English, half-Esquimaux, with the girl's eyes shining like a she-
moose over a dying buck, and about the time we kissed each other, his
head dropped back--and that is all there was about that."

Gaston now kept his eyes on his listeners.  He was aware that his story
must sound to them as brutal as might be, but it was a phase of his life,
and, so far as he could, he wanted to start with a clean sheet; not out
of love of confidence, for he was self-contained, but he would have
enough to do to shepherd his future without shepherding his past.  He saw
that Lady Belward had a sickly fear in her face, while Sir William had
gone stern and hard.

He went on:

"It saved the situation, did that marriage; though it was no marriage you
will say.  Neither was it one way, and I didn't intend at the start to
stand by it an hour longer than I wished.  But she was more than I looked
for, and it seems to me that she saved my life that winter, or my reason
anyhow.  There had been so much tragedy that I used to wonder every day
what would happen before night; and that's not a good thing for the brain
of a chap of twenty-one or two.  The funny part of it is that she wasn't
a pagan--not a bit.  She could read and speak English in a sweet old-
fashioned way, and she used to sing to me--such a funny, sorry little
voice she had--hymns the Moravians had taught her, and one or two English
songs.  I taught her one or two besides, 'Where the Hawthorn Tree is
Blooming,' and 'Allan Water'--the first my father had taught me, the
other an old Scotch trader.  It's different with a woman and a man in a
place like that.  Two men will go mad together, but there's a saving
something in the contact of a man's brain with a woman's.  I got fond of
her, any man would have, for she had something that I never saw in any
heathen, certainly in no Indian; you'll see it in women from Iceland.
I determined to marry her in regular style when spring and a missionary
came.  You can't understand, maybe, how one can settle to a life where
you've got companionship, and let the world go by.  About that time, I
thought that I'd let Ridley Court and the rest of it go as a boy's dreams
go.  I didn't seem to know that I was only satisfied in one set of my
instincts.  Spring came, so did a missionary, and for better or worse it
was."

Sir William came to his feet.  "Great Heaven!" he broke out.

His wife tried to rise, but could not.

"This makes everything impossible," added the baronet shortly.

"No, no, it makes nothing impossible--if you will listen."

Gaston was cool.  He had begun playing for the stakes from one stand-
point, and he would not turn back.

He continued:

"I lived with her happily: I never expect to have happiness like that
again,--never,--and after two years at another post in Labrador, came
word from the Company that I might go to Quebec, there to be given my
choice of posts.  I went.  By this time I had again vague ideas that
sometime I should come here, but how or why I couldn't tell; I was
drifting, and for her sake willing to drift.  I was glad to take her to
Quebec, for I guessed she would get ideas, and it didn't strike me that
she would be out of place.  So we went.  But she was out of place in
many ways.  It did not suit at all.  We were asked to good houses, for I
believe I have always had enough of the Belward in me to keep my end up
anywhere.  The thing went on pretty well, but at last she used to beg me
to go without her to excursions and parties.  There were always one or
two quiet women whom she liked to sit with, and because she seemed
happier for me to go, I did.  I was popular, and got along with women
well; but I tell you honestly I loved my wife all the time; so that when
a Christian busy-body poured into her ears some self-made scandal, it was
a brutal, awful lie--brutal and awful, for she had never known jealousy;
it did not belong to her old social creed.  But it was in the core of her
somewhere, and an aboriginal passion at work naked is a thing to be
remembered.  I had to face it one night.  .  .  .

"I was quiet, and did what I could.  After that I insisted on her going
with me wherever I went, but she had changed, and I saw that, in spite of
herself, the thing grew.  One day we went on an excursion down the St.
Lawrence.  We were merry, and I was telling yarns.  We were just nearing
a landing-stage, when a pretty girl, with more gush than sense, caught me
by the arm and begged some ridiculous thing of me--an autograph, or what
not.  A minute afterwards I saw my wife spring from the bulwarks down on
the landing-stage, and rush up the shore into the woods.  .  .  .  We
were two days finding her.  That settled it.  I was sick enough at heart,
and I determined to go back to Labrador.  We did so.  Every thing had
gone on the rocks.  My wife was not, never would be, the same again.  She
taunted me and worried me, and because I would not quarrel, seemed to
have a greater grievance--jealousy is a kind of madness.  One night she
was most galling, and I sat still and said nothing.  My life seemed gone
of a heap: I was sick--sick to the teeth; hopeless, looking forward to
nothing.  I imagine my hard quietness roused her.  She said something
hateful--something about having married her, and not a woman from Quebec.
I smiled--I couldn't help it; then I laughed, a bit wild, I suppose.
I saw the flash of steel.  .  .  .  I believe I laughed in her face as I
fell.  When I came to she was lying with her head on my breast--dead--
stone dead."

Lady Belward sat with closed eyes, her fingers clasping and unclasping on
the top of her cane; but Sir William wore a look half-satisfied, half-
excited.

He now hurried his story.

"I got well, and after that stayed in the North for a year.  Then I
passed down the continent to Mexico and South America.  There I got a
commission to go to New Zealand and Australia to sell a lot of horses.
I did so, and spent some time in the South Sea Islands.  Again I drifted
back to the Rockies and over into the plains; found Jacques Brillon, my
servant, had a couple of years' work and play, gathered together some
money, as good a horse and outfit as the North could give, and started
with Brillon and his broncho--having got both sense and experience, I
hope--for Ridley Court.  And here I am.  There's a lot of my life that I
haven't told you of, but it doesn't matter, because it's adventure
mostly, and it can be told at any time; but these are essential facts,
and it is better that you should hear them.  And that is all, grandfather
and grandmother."

After a minute Lady Belward rose, leaned on her crutch, and looked at him
wistfully.  Sir William said: "Are you sure that you will suit this life,
or it you?"

"It is the only idea I have at present; and, anyhow, it is my rightful
home, sir."

"I was not thinking of your rights, but of the happiness of us all."

Lady Belward limped to him, and laid a hand on his shoulder.

"You have had one great tragedy, so have we: neither could bear another.
Try to be worthy--of your home."

Then she solemnly kissed him on the cheek.  Soon afterwards they went to
their rooms.




CHAPTER IV

AN HOUR WITH HIS FATHER'S PAST

In his bedroom Gaston made a discovery.  He chanced to place his hand in
the tail-pocket of the coat he had worn.  He drew forth a letter.  The
ink was faded, and the lines were scrawled.  It ran:

     It's no good.  Mr. Ian's been!  It's face the musik now.  If you
     want me, say so.  I'm for kicks or ha'pence--no diffrense.
                                                       Yours, J.

He knew the writing very well--Jock Lawson's.  There had been some
trouble, and Mr. Ian had "been," bringing peril.  What was it?  His
father and Jock had kept the secret from him.

He put his hand in the pocket again.  There was another note--this time
in a woman's handwriting:

     Oh, come to me, if you would save us both!  Do not fail.  God help
     us!  Oh, Robert!

It was signed "Agnes."

Well, here was something of mystery; but he did not trouble himself about
that.  He was not at Ridley Court to solve mysteries, to probe into the
past, to set his father's wrongs right; but to serve himself, to reap for
all those years wherein his father had not reaped.  He enjoyed life, and
he would search this one to the full of his desires.  Before he retired
he studied the room, handling things that lay where his father placed
them so many years before.  He was not without emotions in this, but he
held himself firm.

As he stood ready to get into bed, his eyes chanced upon a portrait of
his uncle Ian.

"There's where the tug comes!" he said, nodding at it.  "Shake hands,
and ten paces, Uncle Ian?"

Then he blew out the candle, and in five minutes was sound asleep.

He was out at six o'clock.  He made for the stables, and found Jacques
pacing the yard.  He smiled at Jacques's dazed look.

"What about the horse, Brillon?" he said, nodding as he came up.

"Saracen's had a slice of the stable-boy's shoulder--sir."

Amusement loitered in Gaston's eyes.  The "sir" had stuck in Jacques's
throat.

"Saracen has established himself, then?  Good!  And the broncho?"

"Bien, a trifle only.  They laugh much in the kitchen--"

"The hall, Brillon."

"--in the hall last night.  That hired man over there--"

"That groom, Brillon."

"--that groom, he was a fool, and fat.  He was the worst.  This morning
he laugh at my broncho.  He say a horse like that is nothing: no pace, no
travel.  I say the broncho was not so ver' bad, and I tell him try the
paces.  I whisper soft, and the broncho stand like a lamb.  He mount,
and sneer, and grin at the high pommel, and start.  For a minute it was
pretty; and then I give a little soft call, and in a minute there was the
broncho bucking--doubling like a hoop, and dropping same as lead.  Once
that--groom--come down on the pommel, then over on the ground like a
ball, all muck and blood."

The half-breed paused, looking innocently before him.  Gaston's mouth
quirked.

"A solid success, Brillon.  Teach them all the tricks you can.  At ten
o'clock come to my room.  The campaign begins then."

Jacques ran a hand through his long black hair, and fingered his sash.
Gaston understood.

"The hair and ear-rings may remain, Brillon; but the beard and clothes
must go--except for occasions.  Come along."

For the next two hours Gaston explored the stables and the grounds.
Nothing escaped him.  He gathered every incident of the surroundings,
and talked to the servants freely, softly, and easily, yet with a
superiority, which suddenly was imposed in the case of the huntsman at
the kennels--for the Whipshire hounds were here.  Gaston had never ridden
to hounds.  It was not, however, his cue to pretend knowledge.  He was
strong enough to admit ignorance.  He stood leaning against the door of
the kennels, arms folded, eyes half-closed, with the sense of a painter,
before the turning bunch of brown and white, getting the charm of
distance and soft tones.  His blood beat hard, for suddenly he felt as
if he had been behind just such a pack one day, one clear desirable day
of spring.  He saw people gathering at the kennels; saw men drink beer
and eat sandwiches at the door of the huntsman's house,--a long, low
dwelling, with crumbling arched doorways like those of a monastery,
watched them get away from the top of the moor, he among them; heard
the horn, the whips; and saw the fox break cover.

Then came a rare run for five sweet miles--down a long valley--over
quick-set hedges, with stiffish streams--another hill--a great combe--
a lovely valley stretching out--a swerve to the right--over a gate--
and the brush got at a farmhouse door.

Surely, he had seen it all; but what kink of the brain was it that the
men wore flowing wigs and immense boot-legs, and sported lace in the
hunting-field?  And why did he see within that picture another of two
ladies and a gentleman hawking?

He was roused from his dream by hearing the huntsman say in a quizzical
voice:

"How do you like the dogs, sir?"

To his last day Lugley, the huntsman, remembered the slow look of cold
surprise, of masterful malice, scathing him from head to foot.  The words
that followed the look, simple as they were, drove home the naked
reproof:

"What is your name, my man?"

"Lugley, sir."

"Lugley!  Lugley!  H'm!  Well, Lugley, I like the hounds better than
I like you.  Who is Master of the Hounds, Lugley?"

"Captain Maudsley, sir."

"Just so.  You are satisfied with your place, Lugley?"

"Yes, sir," said the man in a humble voice, now cowed.

The news of the arrival of the strangers had come to him late at night,
and, with Whipshire stupidity, he had thought that any one coming from
the wilds of British America must be but a savage after all.

"Very well; I wouldn't throw myself out of a place, if I were you."

"Oh, no, sir!  Beg pardon, sir, I--"

"Attend to your hounds there, Lugley."

So saying, Gaston nodded Jacques away with him, leaving the huntsman sick
with apprehension.

"You see how it is to be done, Brillon?" said Gaston.  Jacques's brown
eyes twinkled.

"You have the grand trick, sir."

"I enjoy the game; and so shall you, if you will.  You've begun well.
I don't know much of this life yet; but it seems to me that they are all
part of a machine, not the idea behind the machine.  They have no
invention.  Their machine is easy to learn.  Do not pretend; but for
every bit you learn show something better, something to make them dizzy
now and then."

He paused on a knoll and looked down.  The castle, the stables, the
cottages of labourers and villagers lay before them.  In a certain
highly-cultivated field, men were working.  It was cut off in squares and
patches.  It had an air which struck Gaston as unusual; why, he could not
tell.  But he had a strange divining instinct, or whatever it may be
called.  He made for the field and questioned the workmen.

The field was cut up into allotment gardens.  Here, at a nominal rent,
the cottager could grow his vegetables; a little spot of the great acre
of England, which gave the labourer a tiny sense of ownership, of
manhood.  Gaston was interested.  More, he was determined to carry that
experiment further, if he ever got the chance.  There was no socialism
in him.  The true barbarian is like the true aristocrat: more a giver of
gifts than a lover of co-operation; conserving ownership by right of
power and superior independence, hereditary or otherwise.  Gaston was
both barbarian and aristocrat.

"Brillon," he said, as they walked on, "do you think they would be
happier on the prairies with a hundred acres of land, horses, cows,
and a pen of pigs?"

"Can I be happy here all at once, sir?"

"That's just it.  It's too late for them.  They couldn't grasp it unless
they went when they were youngsters.  They'd long for 'Home and Old
England' and this grub-and-grind life.  Gracious heaven, look at them--
crumpled-up creatures!  And I'll stake my life, they were as pretty
children as you'd care to see.  They are out of place in the landscape,
Brillon; for it is all luxury and lush, and they are crumples--crumples!
But yet there isn't any use being sorry for them, for they don't grasp
anything outside the life they are living.  Can't you guess how they
live?  Look at the doors of the houses shut, and the windows sealed;
yet they've been up these three hours!  And they'll suck in bad air,
and bad food; and they'll get cancer, and all that; and they'll die and
be trotted away to the graveyard for 'passun' to hurry them into their
little dark cots, in the blessed hope of everlasting life!  I'm going to
know this thing, Brillon, from tooth to ham-string; and, however it goes,
we'll have lived up and down the whole scale; and that's something."

He suddenly stopped, and then added:

"I'm likely to go pretty far in this.  I can't tell how or why, but it's
so.  Now, once more, as yesterday afternoon, for good or for bad, for
long or for short, for the gods or for the devil, are you with me?
There's time to turn back even yet, and I'll say no word to your going."

"But no, no! a vow is a vow.  When I cannot run I will walk, when I
cannot walk I will crawl after you--comme ca!"

Lady Belward did not appear at breakfast.  Sir William and Gaston
breakfasted alone at half past nine o'clock.  The talk was of the
stables and the estate generally.

The breakfast-room looked out on a soft lawn, stretching away into a
broad park, through which a stream ran; and beyond was a green hillside.
The quiet, the perfect order and discipline, gave a pleasant tingle to
Gaston's veins.  It was all so easy, and yet so admirable--elegance
without weight.  He felt at home.  He was not certain of some trifles
of etiquette; but he and Sir William were alone, and he followed his
instincts.  Once he frankly asked his grandfather of a matter of form,
of which he was uncertain the evening before.  The thing was done so
naturally that the conventional mind of the baronet was not disturbed.
The Belwards were notable for their brains, and Sir William saw that
the young man had an unusual share.  He also felt that this startling
individuality might make a hazardous future; but he liked the fellow, and
he had a debt to pay to the son of his own dead son.  Of course, if their
wills came into conflict, there could be but one thing--the young man
must yield; or, if he played the fool, there must be an end.  Still, he
hoped the best.  When breakfast was finished, he proposed going to the
library.

There Sir William talked of the future, asked what Gaston's ideas were,
and questioned him as to his present affairs.  Gaston frankly said that
he wanted to live as his father would have done, and that he had no
property, and no money beyond a hundred pounds, which would last him
a couple of years on the prairies, but would be fleeting here.

Sir William at once said that he would give him a liberal allowance,
with, of course, the run of his own stables and their house in town:
and when he married acceptably, his allowance would be doubled.

"And I wish to say, Gaston," he added, "that your uncle Ian, though heir
to the title, does not necessarily get the property, which is not
entailed.  Upon that point I need hardly say more.  He has disappointed
us.

"Through him Robert left us.  Of his character I need not speak.  Of his
ability the world speaks variably: he is an artist.  Of his morals I need
only say that they are scarcely those of an English gentleman, though
whether that is because he is an artist, I cannot say--I really cannot
say.  I remember meeting a painter at Lord Dunfolly's,--Dunfolly is a
singular fellow--and he struck me chiefly as harmless, distinctly
harmless.  I could not understand why he was at Dunfolly's, he seemed
of so little use, though Lady Malfire, who writes or something, mooned
with him a good deal.  I believe there was some scandal or something
afterwards.  I really do not know.  But you are not a painter, and I
believe you have character--I fancy so."

"If you mean that I don't play fast and loose, sir, you are right.
What I do, I do as straight as a needle."  The old man sighed carefully.

"You are very like Robert, and yet there is something else.  I don't
know, I really don't know what!"

"I ought to have more in me than the rest of the family, sir."

This was somewhat startling.  Sir William's fingers stroked his beardless
cheek uncertainly.  "Possibly--possibly."

"I've lived a broader life, I've got wider standards, and there are three
races at work in me."

"Quite so, quite so;" and Sir William fumbled among his papers nervously.

"Sir," said Gaston suddenly, "I told you last night the honest story of
my life.  I want to start fair and square.  I want the honest story of my
father's life here; how and why he left, and what these letters mean."

He took from his pocket the notes he had found the night before, and
handed them.  Sir William read them with a disturbed look, and turned
them over and over.  Gaston told where he had found them.

Sir William spoke at last.

"The main story is simple enough.  Robert was extravagant, and Ian was
vicious and extravagant also.  Both got into trouble.  I was younger
then, and severe.  Robert hid nothing, Ian all he could.  One day things
came to a climax.  In his wild way, Robert--with Jock Lawson--determined
to rescue a young man from the officers of justice, and to get him out of
the country.  There were reasons.  He was the son of a gentleman; and, as
we discovered afterwards, Robert had been too intimate with the wife--his
one sin of the kind, I believe.  Ian came to know, and prevented the
rescue.  Meanwhile, Robert was liable to the law for the attempt.  There
was a bitter scene here, and I fear that my wife and I said hard things
to Robert."

Gaston's eyes were on Lady Belward's portrait.  "What did my grandmother
say?"

There was a pause, then:

"That she would never call him son again, I believe; that the shadow of
his life would be hateful to her always.  I tell you this because I see
you look at that portrait.  What I said, I think, was no less.  So,
Robert, after a wild burst of anger, flung away from us out of the house.
His mother, suddenly repenting, ran to follow him, but fell on the stone
steps at the door, and became a cripple for life.  At first she remained
bitter against Robert, and at that time Ian painted that portrait.  It is
clever, as you may see, and weird.  But there came a time when she kept
it as a reproach to herself, not Robert.  She is a good woman--a very
good woman.  I know none better, really no one."

"What became of the arrested man?" Gaston asked quietly, with the
oblique suggestiveness of a counsel.

"He died of a broken blood-vessel on the night of the intended rescue,
and the matter was hushed up."

"What became of the wife?"

"She died also within a year."

"Were there any children?"

"One--a girl."

"Whose was the child?"

"You mean--?"

"The husband's or the lover's?"  There was a pause.

"I cannot tell you."

"Where is the girl?"

"My son, do not ask that.  It can do no good--really no good."

"Is it not my due?"

"Do not impose your due.  Believe me, I know best.  If ever there is need
to tell you, you shall be told.  Trust me.  Has not the girl her due
also?"

Gaston's eyes held Sir William's a moment.  "You are right, sir," he
said, "quite right.  I shall not try to know.  But if--"  He paused.

Sir William spoke:

"There is but one person in the world who knows the child's father; and I
could not ask him, though I have known him long and well--indeed, no."

"I do not ask to understand more," Gaston replied.  "I almost wish I had
known nothing.  And yet I will ask one thing: is the girl in comfort and
good surroundings?"

"The best--ah, yes, the very best."

There was a pause, in which both sat thinking; then Sir William wrote out
a cheque and offered it, with a hint of emotion.  He was recalling how he
had done the same with this boy's father.

Gaston understood.  He got up, and said: "Honestly, sir, I don't know how
I shall turn out here; for, if I didn't like it, it couldn't hold me, or,
if it did, I should probably make things uncomfortable.  But I think I
shall like it, and I will do my best to make things go well.  Good-
morning, sir."

With courteous attention Sir William let his grandson out of the room.

And thus did a young man begin his career as Gaston Belward, gentleman.




CHAPTER V.

WHEREIN HE FINDS HIS ENEMY

How that career was continued there are many histories: Jock Lawson's
mother tells of it in her way, Mrs. Gasgoyne in hers, Hovey in hers,
Captain Maudsley in his; and so on.  Each looks at it from an individual
stand-point.  But all agree on two matters: that he did things hitherto
unknown in the countryside; and that he was free and affable, but could
pull one up smartly if necessary.

He would sit by the hour and talk with Bimley, the cottager; with Rosher,
the hotel-keeper, who when young had travelled far; with a sailorman,
home for a holiday, who said he could spin a tidy yarn; and with Pogan,
the groom, who had at last won Saracen's heart.  But one day when the
meagre village chemist saw him cracking jokes with Beard, the carpenter,
and sidled in with a silly air of equality, which was merely insolence,
Gaston softly dismissed him, with his ears tingling.  The carpenter
proved his right to be a friend of Gaston's by not changing countenance
and by never speaking of the thing afterwards.

His career was interesting during the eighteen months wherein society
papers chatted of him amiably and romantically.  He had entered into the
joys of hunting with enthusiasm and success, and had made a fast and
admiring friend of Captain Maudsley; while Saracen held his own grandly.
He had dined with country people, and had dined them; had entered upon
the fag-end of the London season with keen, amused enjoyment; and had
engrafted every little use of the convention.  The art was learned, but
the man was always apart from it; using it as a toy, yet not despising
it; for, as he said, it had its points, it was necessary.  There was
yachting in the summer; but he was keener to know the life of England
and his heritage than to roam afar, and most of the year was spent on the
estate and thereabouts: with the steward, with the justices of the peace,
in the fields, in the kennels, among the accounts.

To-day he was in London, haunting Tattersall's, the East End, the docks,
his club, the London Library--he had a taste for English history,
especially for that of the seventeenth century; he saturated himself with
it: to-morrow he would present to his grandfather a scheme for improving
the estate and benefiting the cottagers.  Or he would suddenly enter the
village school, and daze and charm the children by asking them strange
yet simple questions, which sent a shiver of interest to their faces.

One day at the close of his second hunting-season there was to be a ball
at the Court, the first public declaration of acceptance by his people;
for, at his wish, they did not entertain for him in town the previous
season--Lady Belward had not lived in town for years.  But all had gone
so well, if not with absolute smoothness, and with some strangeness,--
that Gaston had become an integral part of their life, and they had
ceased to look for anything sensational.

This ball was to be the seal of their approval.  It had been mentioned in
'Truth' with that freshness and point all its own.  What character than
Gaston's could more appeal to his naive imagination?  It said in a
piquant note that he did not wear a dagger and sombrero.

Everything was ready.  Decorations were up, the cook and the butler had
done their parts.  At eleven in the morning Gaston had time on his hands.
Walking out, he saw two or three children peeping in at the gateway.

He would visit the village school.  He found the junior curate troubling
the youthful mind with what their godfathers and godmothers did for them,
and begging them to do their duty "in that state of life," etc.  He
listened, wondering at the pious opacity, and presently asked the
children to sing.  With inimitable melancholy they sang: "Oh, the Roast
Beef of Old England!"

Gaston sat back and laughed softly till the curate felt uneasy, till the
children, waking to his humour, gurgled a little in the song.  With his
thumbs caught lightly in his waistcoat pockets, he presently began to
talk with the children in an easy, quiet voice.  He asked them little
out-of-the-way questions, he lifted the school-room from their minds, and
then he told them a story, showing them on the map where the place was,
giving them distances, the kind of climate, and a dozen other matters of
information, without the nature of a lesson.  Then he taught them the
chorus--the Board forbade it afterwards--of a negro song, which told how
those who behaved themselves well in this world should ultimately:

"Blow on, blow on, blow on dat silver horn!"

It was on this day that, as he left the school, he saw Ian Belward
driving past.  He had not met his uncle since his arrival,--the artist
had been in Morocco,--nor had he heard of him save through a note in a
newspaper which said that he was giving no powerful work to the world,
nor, indeed, had done so for several years; and that he preferred the
purlieus of Montparnasse to Holland Park.

They recognised each other.  Ian looked his nephew up and down with a
cool kind of insolence as he passed, but did not make any salutation.
Gaston went straight to the castle.  He asked for his uncle, and was told
that he had gone to Lady Belward.  He wandered to the library: it was
empty.  He lit a cigar, took down a copy of Matthew Arnold's poems,
opening at "Sohrab and Rustum," read it with a quick-beating heart, and
then came to "Tristram and Iseult."  He knew little of "that Arthur" and
his knights of the Round Table, and Iseult of Brittany was a new figure
of romance to him.  In Tennyson, he had got no further than "Locksley
Hall," which, he said, had a right tune and wrong words; and "Maud,"
which "was big in pathos."  The story and the metre of "Tristram and
Iseult" beat in his veins.  He got to his feet, and, standing before the
window, repeated a verse aloud:

              "Cheer, cheer thy dogs into the brake,
               O hunter!  and without a fear
               Thy golden-tassell'd bugle blow,
               And through the glades thy pasture take
               For thou wilt rouse no sleepers here!
               For these thou seest are unmoved;
               Cold, cold as those who lived and loved
               A thousand years ago."

He was so engrossed that he did not hear the door open.  He again
repeated the lines with the affectionate modulation of a musician.  He
knew that they were right.  They were hot with life--a life that was no
more a part of this peaceful landscape than a palm-tree would be.  He
felt that he ought to read the poem in a desert, out by the Polar Sea,
down on the Amazon, yonder at Nukualofa; that it would fit in with
bearding the Spaniards two hundred years ago.  Bearding the Spaniards--
what did he mean by that?  He shut his eyes and saw a picture: A Moorish
castle, men firing from the battlements under a blazing sun, a multitude
of troops before a tall splendid-looking man, in armour chased with gold
and silver, and fine ribbons flying.  A woman was lifted upon the
battlements.  He saw the gold of her necklace shake on her flesh like
sunlight on little waves.  He heard a cry:

At that moment some one said behind him: "You have your father's romantic
manner."

He quietly put down the book, and met the other's eyes with a steady
directness.

"Your memory is good, sir."

"Less than thirty years--h'm, not so very long!"

"Looking back--no.  You are my father's brother, Ian Belward?"

"Your uncle Ian."

There was a kind of quizzical loftiness in Ian Belward's manner.

"Well, Uncle Ian, my father asked me to say that he hoped you would get
as much out of life as he had, and that you would leave it as honest."

"Thank you.  That is very like Robert.  He loved making little speeches.
It is a pity we did not pull together; but I was hasty, and he was rash.
He had a foolish career, and you are the result.  My mother has told me
the story--his and yours."

He sat down, ran his fingers through his grey-brown hair, and looking
into a mirror, adjusted the bow of his tie, and flipped the flying ends.
The kind of man was new to Gaston: self-indulgent, intelligent, heavily
nourished, nonchalant, with a coarse kind of handsomeness.  He felt that
here was a man of the world, equipped mentally cap-a-pie, as keen as
cruel.  Reading that in the light of the past, he was ready.

"And yet his rashness will hurt you longer than your haste hurt him."

The artist took the hint bravely.

"That you will have the estate, and I the title, eh?  Well, that looks
likely just now; but I doubt it all the same.  You'll mess the thing one
way or another."

He turned from the contemplation of himself, and eyed Gaston lazily.
Suddenly he started.

"Begad," he said, "where did you get it?"  He rose.

Gaston understood that he saw the resemblance to Sir Gaston Belward.

"Before you were, I am.  I am nearer the real stuff."

The other measured his words insolently:

"But the Pocahontas soils the stream--that's plain."

A moment after Gaston was beside the prostrate body of his uncle,
feeling his heart.

"Good God," he said, "I didn't think I hit so hard!"  He felt the pulse,
looked at the livid face, then caught open the waistcoat and put his ear
to the chest.  He did it all coolly, though swiftly--he was' born for
action and incident.  And during that moment of suspense he thought of a
hundred things, chiefly that, for the sake of the family--the family!
--he must not go to trial.  There were easier ways.

But presently he found that the heart beat.

"Good!  good!" he said, undid the collar, got some water, and rang a
bell.  Falby came.  Gaston ordered some brandy, and asked for Sir
William.  After the brandy had been given, consciousness returned.
Gaston lifted him up.

He presently swallowed more brandy, and while yet his head was at
Gaston's shoulder, said:

"You are a hard hitter.  But you've certainly lost the game now."

Here he made an effort, and with Gaston's assistance got to his feet.
At that moment Falby entered to say that Sir William was not in the
house.  With a wave of the hand Gaston dismissed him.  Deathly pale,
his uncle lifted his eyebrows at the graceful gesture.

"You do it fairly, nephew," he said ironically yet faintly,--"fairly in
such little things; but a gentleman, your uncle, your elder, with fists
--that smacks of low company!"

Gaston made a frank reply as he smothered his pride

"I am sorry for the blow, sir; but was the fault all mine?"

"The fault?  Is that the question?  Faults and manners are not the same.
At bottom you lack in manners; and that will ruin you at last."

"You slighted my mother!"

"Oh, no!  and if I had, you should not have seen it."

"I am not used to swallow insults.  It is your way, sir.  I know your
dealings with my father."

"A little more brandy, please.  But your father had manners, after all.
You are as rash as he; and in essential matters clownish--which he was
not."

Gaston was well in hand now, cooler even than his uncle.

"Perhaps you will sum up your criticism now, sir, to save future
explanation; and then accept my apology."

"To apologise for what no gentleman pardons or does, or acknowledges
openly when done--H'm!  Were it not well to pause in time, and go back
to your wild North?  Why so difficult a saddle--Tartarin after Napoleon?
Think--Tartarin's end!"

Gaston deprecated with a gesture: "Can I do anything for you, sir?"

His uncle now stood up, but swayed a little, and winced from sudden pain.
A wave of malice crossed his face.

"It's a pity we are relatives, with France so near," he said, "for I see
you love fighting."  After an instant he added, with a carelessness as
much assumed as natural: "You may ring the bell, and tell Falby to come
to my room.  And because I am to appear at the flare-up to-night--all in
honour of the prodigal's son--this matter is between us, and we meet as
loving relatives.  You understand my motives, Gaston Robert Belward?"

"Thoroughly."

Gaston rang the bell, and went to open the door for his uncle to pass
out.  Ian Belward buttoned his close-fitting coat, cast a glance in the
mirror, and then eyed Gaston's fine figure and well-cut clothes.  In the
presence of his nephew, there grew the envy of a man who knew that youth
was passing while every hot instinct and passion remained.  For his age
he was impossibly young.  Well past fifty he looked thirty-five, no more.
His luxurious soul loathed the approach of age.  Unlike many men of
indulgent natures, he loved youth for the sake of his art, and he had
sacrificed upon that altar more than most men-sacrificed others.  His
cruelty was not as that of the roughs of Seven Dials or Belleville, but
it was pitiless.  He admitted to those who asked him why and wherefore
when his selfishness became brutality, that everything had to give way
for his work.  His painting of Ariadne represented the misery of two
women's lives.  And of such was his kingdom of Art.

As he now looked at Gaston he was again struck with the resemblance to
the portrait in the dining-room, with his foreign out-of-the-way air:
something that should be seen beneath the flowing wigs of the Stuart
period.  He had long wanted to do a statue of the ill-fated Monmouth,
and another greater than that.  Here was the very man: with a proud,
daring, homeless look, a splendid body, and a kind of cavalier conceit.
It was significant of him, of his attitude towards himself where his work
was concerned, that he suddenly turned and shut the door again, telling
Falby, who appeared, to go to his room; and then said:

"You are my debtor, Cadet--I shall call you that: you shall have a chance
of paying."

"How?"

In a few concise words he explained, scanning the other's face eagerly.

Gaston showed nothing.  He had passed the apogee of irritation.

"A model?" he questioned drily.

"Well, if you put it that way.  'Portrait' sounds better.  It shall be
Gaston Belward, gentleman; but we will call it in public, 'Monmouth the
Trespasser.'"

Gaston did not wince.  He had taken all the revenge he needed.  The idea
rather pleased him than other wise.  He had instincts about art, and he
liked pictures; statuary, poetry, romance; but he had no standards.  He
was keen also to see the life of the artist, to touch that aristocracy
more distinguished by mind than manners.

"If that gives 'clearance,' yes.  And your debt to me?"

"I owe you nothing.  You find your own meaning in my words.  I was
railing, you were serious.  Do not be serious.  Assume it sometimes,
if you will; be amusing mostly.  So, you will let me paint you--on your
own horse, eh?"

"That is asking much.  Where?"

"Well, a sketch here this afternoon, while the thing is hot--if this
damned headache stops!  Then at my studio in London in the spring, or"
--here he laughed--"in Paris.  I am modest, you see."

"As you will."

Gaston had had a desire for Paris, and this seemed to give a cue for
going.  He had tested London nearly all round.  He had yet to be
presented at St. James's, and elected a member of the Trafalgar Club.
Certainly he had not visited the Tower, Windsor Castle, and the Zoo;
but that would only disqualify him in the eyes of a colonial.

His uncle's face flushed slightly.  He had not expected such good
fortune.  He felt that he could do anything with this romantic figure.
He would do two pictures: Monmouth, and an ancient subject--that legend
of the ancient city of Ys, on the coast of Brittany.  He had had it in
his mind for years.  He came back and sat down, keen, eager.

"I've a big subject brewing," he said; "better than the Monmouth, though
it is good enough as I shall handle it.  It shall be royal, melancholy,
devilish: a splendid bastard with creation against him; the best, most
fascinating subject in English history.  The son dead on against the
father--and the uncle!"

He ceased for a minute, fashioning the picture in his mind; his face
pale, but alive with interest, which his enthusiasm made into dignity.
Then he went on:

"But the other: when the king takes up the woman--his mistress--and rides
into the sea with her on his horse, to save the town!  By Heaven, with
you to sit, it's my chance!  You've got it all there in you--the immense
manner.  You, a nineteenth century gentleman, to do this game of Ridley
Court, and paddle round the Row?  Not you!  You're clever, and you're
crafty, and you've a way with you.  But you'll come a cropper at this as
sure as I shall paint two big pictures--if you'll stand to your word."

"We need not discuss my position here.  I am in my proper place--in my
father's home.  But for the paintings and Paris, as you please."

"That is sensible--Paris is sensible; for you ought to see it right, and
I'll show you what half the world never see, and wouldn't appreciate if
they did.  You've got that old, barbaric taste, romance, and you'll find
your metier in Paris."

Gaston now knew the most interesting side of his uncle's character--which
few people ever saw, and they mostly women who came to wish they had
never felt the force of that occasional enthusiasm.  He had been in the
National Gallery several times, and over and over again he had visited
the picture places in Bond Street as he passed; but he wanted to get
behind art life, to dig out the heart of it.




ETEXT EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

He was strong enough to admit ignorance
Not to show surprise at anything
Truth waits long, but whips hard





*** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE TRESPASSER, BY PARKER, V1 ***

******** This file should be named 6219.txt or 6219.zip **********

This eBook was produced by David Widger

Project Gutenberg eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the US
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we usually do not
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

We are now trying to release all our eBooks one year in advance
of the official release dates, leaving time for better editing.
Please be encouraged to tell us about any error or corrections,
even years after the official publication date.

Please note neither this listing nor its contents are final til
midnight of the last day of the month of any such announcement.
The official release date of all Project Gutenberg eBooks is at
Midnight, Central Time, of the last day of the stated month.  A
preliminary version may often be posted for suggestion, comment
and editing by those who wish to do so.

Most people start at our Web sites at:
http://gutenberg.net or
http://promo.net/pg

These Web sites include award-winning information about Project
Gutenberg, including how to donate, how to help produce our new
eBooks, and how to subscribe to our email newsletter (free!).


Those of you who want to download any eBook before announcement
can get to them as follows, and just download by date.  This is
also a good way to get them instantly upon announcement, as the
indexes our cataloguers produce obviously take a while after an
announcement goes out in the Project Gutenberg Newsletter.

http://www.ibiblio.org/gutenberg/etext03 or
ftp://ftp.ibiblio.org/pub/docs/books/gutenberg/etext03

Or /etext02, 01, 00, 99, 98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90

Just search by the first five letters of the filename you want,
as it appears in our Newsletters.


Information about Project Gutenberg (one page)

We produce about two million dollars for each hour we work.  The
time it takes us, a rather conservative estimate, is fifty hours
to get any eBook selected, entered, proofread, edited, copyright
searched and analyzed, the copyright letters written, etc.   Our
projected audience is one hundred million readers.  If the value
per text is nominally estimated at one dollar then we produce $2
million dollars per hour in 2002 as we release over 100 new text
files per month:  1240 more eBooks in 2001 for a total of 4000+
We are already on our way to trying for 2000 more eBooks in 2002
If they reach just 1-2% of the world's population then the total
will reach over half a trillion eBooks given away by year's end.

The Goal of Project Gutenberg is to Give Away 1 Trillion eBooks!
This is ten thousand titles each to one hundred million readers,
which is only about 4% of the present number of computer users.

Here is the briefest record of our progress (* means estimated):

eBooks Year Month

    1  1971 July
   10  1991 January
  100  1994 January
 1000  1997 August
 1500  1998 October
 2000  1999 December
 2500  2000 December
 3000  2001 November
 4000  2001 October/November
 6000  2002 December*
 9000  2003 November*
10000  2004 January*


The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been created
to secure a future for Project Gutenberg into the next millennium.

We need your donations more than ever!

As of February, 2002, contributions are being solicited from people
and organizations in: Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Connecticut,
Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois,
Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Massachusetts,
Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New
Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Ohio,
Oklahoma, Oregon, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South
Dakota, Tennessee, Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West
Virginia, Wisconsin, and Wyoming.

We have filed in all 50 states now, but these are the only ones
that have responded.

As the requirements for other states are met, additions to this list
will be made and fund raising will begin in the additional states.
Please feel free to ask to check the status of your state.

In answer to various questions we have received on this:

We are constantly working on finishing the paperwork to legally
request donations in all 50 states.  If your state is not listed and
you would like to know if we have added it since the list you have,
just ask.

While we cannot solicit donations from people in states where we are
not yet registered, we know of no prohibition against accepting
donations from donors in these states who approach us with an offer to
donate.

International donations are accepted, but we don't know ANYTHING about
how to make them tax-deductible, or even if they CAN be made
deductible, and don't have the staff to handle it even if there are
ways.

Donations by check or money order may be sent to:

Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
PMB 113
1739 University Ave.
Oxford, MS 38655-4109

Contact us if you want to arrange for a wire transfer or payment
method other than by check or money order.

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation has been approved by
the US Internal Revenue Service as a 501(c)(3) organization with EIN
[Employee Identification Number] 64-622154.  Donations are
tax-deductible to the maximum extent permitted by law.  As fund-raising
requirements for other states are met, additions to this list will be
made and fund-raising will begin in the additional states.

We need your donations more than ever!

You can get up to date donation information online at:

http://www.gutenberg.net/donation.html


***

If you can't reach Project Gutenberg,
you can always email directly to:

Michael S. Hart <hart@pobox.com>

Prof. Hart will answer or forward your message.

We would prefer to send you information by email.


**The Legal Small Print**


(Three Pages)

***START**THE SMALL PRINT!**FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS**START***
Why is this "Small Print!" statement here? You know: lawyers.
They tell us you might sue us if there is something wrong with
your copy of this eBook, even if you got it for free from
someone other than us, and even if what's wrong is not our
fault. So, among other things, this "Small Print!" statement
disclaims most of our liability to you. It also tells you how
you may distribute copies of this eBook if you want to.

*BEFORE!* YOU USE OR READ THIS EBOOK
By using or reading any part of this PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
eBook, you indicate that you understand, agree to and accept
this "Small Print!" statement. If you do not, you can receive
a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this eBook by
sending a request within 30 days of receiving it to the person
you got it from. If you received this eBook on a physical
medium (such as a disk), you must return it with your request.

ABOUT PROJECT GUTENBERG-TM EBOOKS
This PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook, like most PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks,
is a "public domain" work distributed by Professor Michael S. Hart
through the Project Gutenberg Association (the "Project").
Among other things, this means that no one owns a United States copyright
on or for this work, so the Project (and you!) can copy and
distribute it in the United States without permission and
without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth
below, apply if you wish to copy and distribute this eBook
under the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark.

Please do not use the "PROJECT GUTENBERG" trademark to market
any commercial products without permission.

To create these eBooks, the Project expends considerable
efforts to identify, transcribe and proofread public domain
works. Despite these efforts, the Project's eBooks and any
medium they may be on may contain "Defects". Among other
things, Defects may take the form of incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged
disk or other eBook medium, a computer virus, or computer
codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.

LIMITED WARRANTY; DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES
But for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described below,
[1] Michael Hart and the Foundation (and any other party you may
receive this eBook from as a PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBook) disclaims
all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including
legal fees, and [2] YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE OR
UNDER STRICT LIABILITY, OR FOR BREACH OF WARRANTY OR CONTRACT,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE
OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES, EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE
POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGES.

If you discover a Defect in this eBook within 90 days of
receiving it, you can receive a refund of the money (if any)
you paid for it by sending an explanatory note within that
time to the person you received it from. If you received it
on a physical medium, you must return it with your note, and
such person may choose to alternatively give you a replacement
copy. If you received it electronically, such person may
choose to alternatively give you a second opportunity to
receive it electronically.

THIS EBOOK IS OTHERWISE PROVIDED TO YOU "AS-IS". NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, ARE MADE TO YOU AS
TO THE EBOOK OR ANY MEDIUM IT MAY BE ON, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A
PARTICULAR PURPOSE.

Some states do not allow disclaimers of implied warranties or
the exclusion or limitation of consequential damages, so the
above disclaimers and exclusions may not apply to you, and you
may have other legal rights.

INDEMNITY
You will indemnify and hold Michael Hart, the Foundation,
and its trustees and agents, and any volunteers associated
with the production and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
texts harmless, from all liability, cost and expense, including
legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the
following that you do or cause:  [1] distribution of this eBook,
[2] alteration, modification, or addition to the eBook,
or [3] any Defect.

DISTRIBUTION UNDER "PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm"
You may distribute copies of this eBook electronically, or by
disk, book or any other medium if you either delete this
"Small Print!" and all other references to Project Gutenberg,
or:

[1]  Only give exact copies of it.  Among other things, this
     requires that you do not remove, alter or modify the
     eBook or this "small print!" statement.  You may however,
     if you wish, distribute this eBook in machine readable
     binary, compressed, mark-up, or proprietary form,
     including any form resulting from conversion by word
     processing or hypertext software, but only so long as
     *EITHER*:

     [*]  The eBook, when displayed, is clearly readable, and
          does *not* contain characters other than those
          intended by the author of the work, although tilde
          (~), asterisk (*) and underline (_) characters may
          be used to convey punctuation intended by the
          author, and additional characters may be used to
          indicate hypertext links; OR

     [*]  The eBook may be readily converted by the reader at
          no expense into plain ASCII, EBCDIC or equivalent
          form by the program that displays the eBook (as is
          the case, for instance, with most word processors);
          OR

     [*]  You provide, or agree to also provide on request at
          no additional cost, fee or expense, a copy of the
          eBook in its original plain ASCII form (or in EBCDIC
          or other equivalent proprietary form).

[2]  Honor the eBook refund and replacement provisions of this
     "Small Print!" statement.

[3]  Pay a trademark license fee to the Foundation of 20% of the
     gross profits you derive calculated using the method you
     already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  If you
     don't derive profits, no royalty is due.  Royalties are
     payable to "Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation"
     the 60 days following each date you prepare (or were
     legally required to prepare) your annual (or equivalent
     periodic) tax return.  Please contact us beforehand to
     let us know your plans and to work out the details.

WHAT IF YOU *WANT* TO SEND MONEY EVEN IF YOU DON'T HAVE TO?
Project Gutenberg is dedicated to increasing the number of
public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed
in machine readable form.

The Project gratefully accepts contributions of money, time,
public domain materials, or royalty free copyright licenses.
Money should be paid to the:
"Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

If you are interested in contributing scanning equipment or
software or other items, please contact Michael Hart at:
hart@pobox.com

[Portions of this eBook's header and trailer may be reprinted only
when distributed free of all fees.  Copyright (C) 2001, 2002 by
Michael S. Hart.  Project Gutenberg is a TradeMark and may not be
used in any sales of Project Gutenberg eBooks or other materials be
they hardware or software or any other related product without
express permission.]

*END THE SMALL PRINT! FOR PUBLIC DOMAIN EBOOKS*Ver.02/11/02*END*
