The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Perils of Pauline, by Charles Goddard

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net


Title: The Perils of Pauline

Author: Charles Goddard

Release Date: July 23, 2004 [EBook #6065]

Language: English


*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PERILS OF PAULINE ***




Transcribed by Sean Pobuda





THE PERILS OF PAULINE

By Charles Goddard





CHAPTER I

THE BREATH OF DEAD CENTURIES

In one of the stateliest mansions on the lower Hudson, near New York,
old Stanford Marvin, president of the Marvin Motors Company, dozed over
his papers, while Owen, his confidential secretary, eyed him across the
mahogany flat-topped desk.  A soft purring sound floated in the open
window and half-roused the aged manufacturer.  It came from one of his
own cars--six cylinders chanting in unison a litany of power to the
great modern god of gasoline.

These things had been in his mind since the motor industry started.  He
had lived with them, wrestled with them during his meals and taken them
to his dreams at night.  Now they formed a rhythm, and he heard them in
his brain just before the fainting spells, which had come so frequently
of late.  He glanced at the secretary and noted Owen's gaze with
something of a start.

"What are you thinking about, Raymond?" he queried, with his customary
directness.

"Your health, sir," replied Owen, who, like all intelligent rascals,
never lied when the truth would do equally well.  As a matter of fact,
Owen had wondered whether his employer would last a year or a month.
He much preferred a month, for there was reason to believe that the
Marvin will would contain a handsome bequest to "my faithful
secretary."

"Oh, bosh!" said the old man.  "You and Dr. Stevens would make a mummy
of me before I'm dead."

"That reminds me, sir," said Owen, smoothly,  "that the International
Express Company has delivered a large crate addressed to you from
Cairo, Egypt.  I presume it is the mummy you bought on your last trip.
Where shall I place it?"

Mr. Marvin's eye coursed around the walls of the handsome library,
which had been his office since the doctor had forbidden him to visit
his automobile works and steel-stamping mills.

"Take out that bust of Pallas Athene," he ordered, "and stand the mummy
up in its place."

Owen nodded, poised his pencil and prompted:

"You were just dictating about the new piston rings."

Mr. Marvin drew his hand across his eyes and looked out the window.
Within the range of his vision was one of the most charming sights in
the world--a handsome youth and a pretty girl, arrayed in white
flannels, playing tennis.

"Never mind the letters.  Tell Harry and Pauline I wish to see them."

Alone, the old man opened a drawer and took a dose of medicine, then he
unfolded Dr. Stevens's letter and read its final paragraph, which
prescribed a change of climate, together with complete and permanent
rest or "I will not answer for the consequences."

There was little doubt that no primer mover in a great industry was
better able to leave its helm than Standford Marvin.  His  lieutenants
were able, efficient and contented.  The factories would go of their
own momentum for a year or two at least, then his son, Harry, just out
of college, should be able, perhaps, to help.  His lieutenants had
proved Marvin's unerring instinct in judging character.  Not one single
case came to the old employer's mind of a man who had failed to turn
out exactly as he expected.  Yet the most trusted man of all, Raymond
Owen, the secretary, was disloyal and dishonest.

This one exception was easily enough explained.  When Owen came to
Marvin's attention, fifteen years before, he was a fine, honest,
faithful man.  It was born and bred in him to be straight.  During the
first five' or six years in the Marvin household the older man took
pains to keep watch on this quiet, tactful youth until he knew all his
ways and even his habits of thought. There was no doubt that Owen was
as upright and clean as the old man himself.

At the age of forty the devil entered into Owen.  It came in the form
of insomnia.  Loss of sleep will make any man irritable and
unreasonable, but hardly dishonest.  With the sleeplessness, however,
came the temptation to take drugs.  Owen shifted from one narcotic to
another, finally, settling down upon morphine.  Five years of the
opiate had made him its slave. Every physician knows that morphine
fiends become dishonest.

The secretary had speculated with his modest savings and lost them.  He
had borrowed and lost again, and now, for some time, had been betting
on horse races.  This last had made him acquainted with a certain
Montgomery Hicks, who lived well without visible source of income.
Through Hicks, Owen had betrayed one of his employer's guarded
secrets.  Hicks, armed with this secret, promptly changed from a
friendly creditor to a blackmailer.

Owen, on his way to summon Pauline and Harry, descended to the
basement, where the butler, gardener, and a colored man were uncrating
the Egyptian mummy.  He told them to stand it in place of the bust of
Pallas Athene in the library, and then went out, crossing the splendid
lawns, and graveled roads to the tennis court.  There was no design in
Owen's mind against the two players, but of late the instinct of both
the hunter and the hunted were showing in him, and it prompted him to
approach quietly and under cover.  So he passed along the edge of a
hedge and stood a moment within earshot.

Pauline was about to "serve," but paused to look down at the loosened
laces of her small white shoe.  She heard Harry's racquet drop and saw
him hurdle the net.  In another instant he was at her feet tying the
tiny bow.

"You needn't have done that, Harry," she said.

"Oh, no!" Harry affirmed, as he vainly tried to make his bow as  trim
as its mate.  "I suppose not.  I don't suppose I need to, think, about
you all the time either, or follow you around till that new cocker
spaniel of yours thinks I'm part of your shadow.  Perhaps I don't need
to love you."

"Harry, get up!  Someone will see you and think you're proposing to
me."

"Think?  They ought to know I'm proposing.  But, Pauline, talking about
'need,' there isn't any need of your being so pretty.  Your eyes are
bigger and bluer than they really need to be.  You could see just as
well if you didn't have such long, curly lashes, and there isn't any
real necessity for the way they group together in that starry effect,
like Nell Brinkley's girls.  Is there any need of fifteen different
beautiful shades of light where the sun strikes your hair just back of
your ear?"

"Harry, stop this!  The score is forty-fifteen."

"Yes, all these things are entirely unnecessary.  I'm going to have old
Mother Nature indicted by the Grand jury for willful, wasteful, wanton
extravagance unless--unless--" Harry paused.

"Now, Harry, don't use up your whole vocabulary--promise what?"

"Promise to marry me at once."

"No, Harry, I can't do that--that is, right away.  I must have time."

"Why time?  Pauline, don't you love me?"

"Yes, I think I do love you, Harry, and you know there is nobody else
in the world."

"Then what do you want time for?"

"Why, to see life and to know what life really is."

"All right.  Marry me, and I'll show you life.  I'll lead you any kind
of a life you want."

"No, that won't do.  As an old, settled-down, married woman I couldn't
really do what I want.  I must see life in its great moments.  I must
have thrills, adventures, see people, do daring things, watch battles.
It might be best for me even to see someone killed, if that were
possible.  As I was telling Harley St. John last night--"

"Harley St. John?  Well, if I catch that fop taking you motoring again
you'll get your wish and see a real nice aristocratic murder.  He ought
to be put out of his misery, anyway; but where did you get all these
sudden notions about wild and strenuous life?"

Pauline did not answer.  They both heard a discreet cough, and Owen
rounded the corner of the hedge.  He delivered his message, and the
three walked slowly toward the house.

Advancing to meet them came a dashy checked suit.  Above it was a large
Panama hat with a gaudy ribbon.  A red necktie was also visible, even
at a considerable distance.  Between the hat and the necktie a face
several degrees darker in color than the tie came into view as the
distance lessened.  It was Mr. Montgomery Hicks, whose first name was
usually pronounced "Mugumry" and thence degenerated into "Mug."  Mug's
inflamed and scowling face and bulging eyes usually conveyed the
general impression that he was about to burst into profanity--a
conjecture which frequently proved correct.  In this case he merely
remarked in a sort of "newsboy" voice:

"Mr. Raymond Owen, I believe?"

The secretary's sallow face flushed a little as he stepped aside and
let Harry and Pauline pass out of earshot.

"See here, Mug," complained Owen,  "I haven't a cent for you.  You will
get me discharged if you come around here like this."

"Well, I'll get you fired right now," growled Mug, "if you don't come
across with the money."  And he started toward the front steps.  Owen
led him out of sight of the house and finally got rid of him.  For a
blackmailer knows he can strike but once, and, having struck, he loses
all power over his victim.  So Hicks withheld the blow, collected a
paltry thirty dollars, and consented to wait a little while for Marvin
to die.

Harry and Pauline passed on into the house.  He had the straight
backbone and well poised head of the West Pointer, but without the
unnatural stiffness of the soldier's carriage; the shoulders of the
"halfback," and the lean hips of a runner were his, and he had earned
them in four years on his varsity football and track teams.  The girl
beside him, half a head shorter, tripped along with the easy action of
a thoroughbred.  Both bore the name of Marvin, yet there was no
relationship.

Harry's mother, long dead, had adopted this girl on Mr. Marvin's first
trip to Egypt.  Pauline was the daughter of an English father and a
native mother.

Mrs. Marvin first saw her as a blue-eyed baby, too young to understand
that its parents had just been drowned in the Nile.  As brother and
sister they grew up together until college separated the two.  After
four years Pauline's dainty prettiness struck Harry with a distinct
shock, the delightful sort of shock known as love at first sight.  It
was really Harry's first sight of her as a woman.  Every sense and
instinct in him shouted,  "Get that girl," and nothing in him answered
"No."

Mr. Marvin looked unusually pale as those two very vital young persons
stepped into the library.  He read their thoughts and said quietly.

"Harry, I've been placed in the hands of a receiver."

"Receiver?" echoed Harry, with amazement, for he knew that Marvin
enterprises were financed magnificently.

"Yes, Dr. Stevens is the receiver.  He says I have exhausted my entire
stock of nervous capital, that my account at the bank of physical
endurance is overdrawn, nature has called her loans, and you might say
that I am a nervous bankrupt."

"So All you need is rest," cried Pauline, "and you will be as strong as
ever."

"Well, before I rest I want to assure myself about you children.
Harry, you love Pauline, don't you?"

"You bet I do, father."

"Pauline, you love Harry, don't you?"

"Yes," answered Pauline slowly.

"And you will marry right away?"

"This very minute, if she would have me," said Harry.

"And you, Pauline?" queried the old man.

"Yes, father," for she loved him and felt toward him as if she were
indeed his daughter.  "Perhaps some time I'll marry Harry, but not for
a year or two.  I couldn't marry him now, it wouldn't be right."

"Wouldn't be right??  Well, I'd like to know why not."

Pauline was silent a moment.  She hated to oppose this fine old man,
but her will was as firm as his, and well he knew it.  Harry spoke for
her:

"Oh, she wants to see life before she settles down--wild life, sin
and iniquity, battle, murder and sudden death and all that sort of
stuff.  I don't know what has gotten into women these days, anyway."

Then Polly, prettily, daintily, as she did all things, and with
charming little blushes and hesitations, confessed her secret.  In
short, it was her ambition to be a writer, a writer of something worth
while--a great writer.  To be a great writer one must know life, and
to know life one must see it--see the world.  She ended by asking the
two men if this were not so.

They looked at each other and coughed with evident relief it the
comparative harmlessness of her whim.

"Yes, Polly," said old man Marvin, "a great writer ought to see life in
order to know what he is writing about.  But what makes you suspect
that you have the ability to be even an ordinary writer?"

Marvin sire winked at Marvin son and Marvin son winked back, for no man
is too old or too young to enjoy teasing a pretty and serious girl.

Pauline saw the wink, and her foot ceased tracing a pattern in the
carpet and stamped on it instead.

"I'll show you what reason I have to think I can write.  My first story
has just been published in the biggest magazine in the country.  I have
had a copy of it lying around here for days with my story in it, and
nobody has even looked at it."

Out she flashed, and Harry after her, almost upsetting the butler and
gardener, who appeared in the library doorway.  These two worthies
advanced upon the statue of Pallas without noticing the master of the
house sitting behind his big desk.  The butler did notice that a large
hound from the stable had followed the gardener into the room.

"That's what one gets for letting outdoor servants into the house,"
muttered the butler, as he hustled the big dog to the front door and
ejected him.

"Is he addressing himself to me or to the pup, I wonder?" asked the
gardener, a fat, good-natured Irishman, as he placed himself in front
of the statue.

He read the name "Pallas," forced his rusty derby hat down over his
ears in imitation of the statue's helmet, and mimicked the pose.

Together they staggered out with their burden.  A moment later they
returned, carrying, with the help of two other men, the mummy in its
big case.  Owen also entered, and Marvin, with the joy of an
Egyptologist, grasped a magnifying glass and examined the case.


The old man's bobby had been Egypt, his liberal checks had assisted in
many an excavation, and his knowledge of her relics was remarkable.
Inserting a steel paper cutter in a crack he deftly pried open the
upper half of the mummy's front.  Beneath lay the mass of wrappings in
which thousands of years ago the priests of the Nile had swathed some
lady of wealth and rank.  It was a woman, Marvin was sure, from the
inscriptions on her tomb, and he believed her to be a princess.

The secretary excused himself and went to his room, where his precious
morphine pills were hidden.  The old man, left alone, deftly opened the
many layers of cloth which bound the ancient form.  A faint scent that
was almost like a presence came forth from the unwrapped folds.  Long
lost balms they were, ancient spices, forgotten antiseptics of a great
race that blossomed and Fell--thousands of years before its time.

"I smell the dead centuries," whispered Marvin to himself, "I can
almost feel their weight.  The world was young when this woman
breathed.  Perhaps she was pretty and foolish like my Polly--yes, and
maybe as stubborn, too.  Manetho says they had a good deal to say in
those days.  Ah, now we shall see her face."

He had uncovered a bit of the mummy's forehead when out of the bandages
fell a tiny vial.  Marvin quickly picked it up.  The vial was carved
from some sort of green crystal in the shape of a two-headed Egyptian
bird god.  Without effort the stopper came out and Marvin held the
small bottle to his nostrils, only to drop it at the mummy's feet.  It
exhaled the odor of the mummy which the reek of the centuries
intensified a thousand times.

It was too much for the old man.  He had overtaxed his feeble vitality
and felt his senses leaving him.  With the entire force of his will he
was able to get to a chair, into which he sank.  The odor of the vial
was still in his nostrils.  His eyes were fixed and stared straight
ahead, but he could see, in a faint, unnatural yellow light that bathed
the room.

From the vial, lying at the mummy's feet a vapor appeared to rise.  It
floated toward the swathed figure, enveloped it and seemed to be
absorbed by it.

"Perhaps this is death," thought Marvin, "for I cannot move or speak."

But something else moved.  There was a flutter among the bandages of
the mummy.  The commotion increased.  Something was moving inside.  The
bandages were becoming loosened.  They fell away from the face, and
then was Marvin amazed indeed.  Instead of the tight, brown
parchment-like skin one always finds in these ancient relics appeared a
smooth, olive-tinted complexion.  It was the face of a young and
beautiful woman.  The features were serene as if in death, but there
was no sunken nose or mummy's hollow eyes.

A strand of black hair fell down, and the movement beneath the bandages
increased.  Out of the folds came an arm, a woman's arm, slender, yet
rounded, an arm with light bones and fine sinews, clearly an arm and
hand that had never known work.  Marvin was well aware that a mummy's
arm is invariably a black skeleton claw.

At this point the old man made a mental note that he was not dead, for
he could feel his own breathing.  The arm rapidly and gracefully
loosened and removed wrappings from the neck and breast.  On the wrist
gashed a bracelet made of linked scarabs.  The arm now cast away the
last covering of the bosom, neck and shoulders.

She freed her left hand, lifted out the bottom half of the case and
slid the wrappings from her limbs.  Barefooted and bare-ankled, clothed
only in a shimmering white gown that scarcely covered bare knees, and a
white head-dress with a green serpent head in front, she stepped
somewhat stiffly into the room.  Slowly she made several movements of
limbs and body like the first steps of a dance.  She rose on her toes,
looked down at herself and swayed her lithe hips.  It occurred to
Marvin that all this was by way of a graceful little stretch after a
few thousand years of sleep.

Marvin now observed that she was Pauline's height, and age, as well as
general size and form.  Slightly shorter she might have been, but then
she lacked Pauline's high heels.  The general resemblance was striking
except in the color of the eyes and hair.  Pauline's tresses were a
light golden yellow, while this girl's hair was black as the hollow of
the sphinx.  Pauline's eyes were blue, but she who stood before him
gazed through eyes too dark to guess their color.

The Egyptian had found a little mirror.  She patted her hair, adjusted
the head-dress, but Marvin waited in vain for the powder puff.  From
the mirror the girl's eyes wandered to a painting hanging above the
desk.  It was an excellent likeness of Pauline.  The resemblance
between the two was obvious, not only to Marvin but evidently to the
black-haired girl.  She turned to the old man and addressed him in a
strange language.  Not one word did he recognize, yet the syllables
were so clearly and carefully pronounced that he felt he was listening
to an educated woman.  Some of the tones were like Pauline's, some were
not, but all were soft, sweet, modulated.

The meaning was clear enough.  She wished Marvin to see the
resemblance, and she frowned slightly because the rigid, staring figure
did not respond.  Why should she be impatient, this woman of the
Pharaohs who had lain stiff and unresponsive while Babylon and Greece
and Rome and Spain had risen and fallen?

Soon she resorted to pantomime, pointed to herself and the picture,
touched her eyes and nose and mouth and then the corresponding painted
features.  She felt of her own jet hair, shook her head and looked
questioningly at the light coiffure of Pauline.  She turned to the old
man, evidently asking if the painting were true in this respect.  Then
she smiled a smile like Pauline's.  Perhaps she was asking if Pauline
had changed the color of her hair.

Now she became interested in a book on the corner of the desk.  With
little musical exclamations of delight she turned the printed pages and
appreciated that the shelves contained hundreds more of these
treasures.  The typewritten letters lying about excited her admiration
and then the pen and ink.  She quickly guessed the use of the pen and
ran eagerly to the mummy case.  A moment's search brought forth a long
roll of papyrus.  Before Marvin's eyes she unrolled a scroll covered
with Egyptian hieroglyphics.

There were footsteps in the hall and the Egyptian looked toward the
door.  Owen entered, looked at Marvin searchingly, placed him in a more
comfortable position in the chair, spoke his name and walked out.  What
seemed most surprising to the sick, man was his secretary's oversight
of the girl.  He passed in front of her, almost brushing her white robe
and yet it was clear that he did not see her.

But the Egyptian had seen him and the sight had excited her.  She
seemed desperately anxious to say something to Marvin, something about
Pauline.

The mummy had a secret to reveal!

She tore the bracelet from her right wrist and tried to force it into
Marvin's nerveless grasp.  Try as she would, his muscles did not
respond.  There were voices in the hallway.  Harry and Pauline were
running downstairs.  The Princess gave one last imploring glance at the
paralyzed figure, passed her hand gently over his forehead; then she
stepped quickly back to the case.

Harry and Pauline rushed in, followed less hastily by Owen.  They
grasped the old man's hands, and Harry, seizing the telephone, called
Dr. Stevens.  But to the surprise of everybody Marvin suddenly shook
off the paralysis, spoke, moved and seemed none the worse for his
seizure.





CHAPTER II

THE WILL

Old Mr. Marvin's faculties returned with a snap.  There was the library
just as it had been before his peculiar seizure.  His son Harry was
summoning on the telephone Dr. Stevens, the heart specialist, and
Pauline, his adopted daughter, was on her knees chafing his hands and
anxiously watching his face, while Owen, the secretary, was pouring out
a dose of his medicine.  But the peculiar yellow light had gone.  And
what about the mummy?  It stood just as he had left it, the lower half
of the case was in place, the upper half was out, revealing the
loosened bandages and just a glimpse of the forehead.

One strand of jet black hair hung down.  All was just as it was when
the little vial had fallen out.

"I'm all right, I'm all right," protested Mr. Marvin, somewhat testily,
as he twisted about in his chair to get a good view of the mummy.
"Look out, Harry, don't step on that little bottle."

Harry looked down and picked up the tiny vial which had fallen from the
bandages wrapped about the ancient form.

"Smell of it," his father ordered.  Harry sniffed it and remarked that
it smelled musty and passed it to Pauline.  The girl carried it to her
nostrils spin and again.  She looked perplexed.

"Well, what do you think it is?" asked the old man.

"Why--I can't remember, but I ought to know.  I'm sure I do know."

"The devil you do," muttered her faster father.

"What makes you think you ought to know?"

"Why, it is so familiar.  I'm certain I've smelled it often before.
Haven't I?"

"Well, if you have, Polly, you are a lot older than I am, older than
anything in this country, as old as the pyramids.  That bottle fell out
of the mummy, and I can assure you it has been there some three or four
thousand years.  When I smelled of that bottle it had a queer effect on
me.  I felt as if I were going to have one of my fainting spells and
was glad to get back to the chair.  It's funny about that mummy.  I
thought she came out and talked to me."

"Why, father, what a horrible thing!" sympathized Pauline.

"Not horrible at all.  She was a beauty and a princess.  She was
interested in your picture, Polly, and she looked like you, too,
except, let's see--yes, her hair was black, jet black, like that one
lock you see hanging down."

"Oh," interrupted Pauline, "I wish my hair were black, and I often
dream that it is, and that I am walking around in a pretty, white
pleated dress and my feet are bare."

"And a bracelet on your wrist--your right wrist?" questioned Marvin
eagerly.

"I don't remember," Pauline replied thoughtfully.

"Well, we'll see if you had one and also whether I was dreaming or
not," announced the old man with a half ashamed look as he rose
somewhat unsteadily to his feet.  Harry and Pauline tried to keep him
quiet.  He brushed their warnings aside and walked unsteadily to the
mummy.

"Let's see its face," suggested Harry carelessly.

"No," said his father.  "I have an idea that this old but young lady
would not care to have us look at her.  But there is one thing I must
find out.  I want to know if she wears a bracelet of linked scarabs on
her right wrist or not."

All of this was rather a bore to Harry, who lived intensely in the
present, had no interest in Egypt, except that Pauline was born and
adopted as an orphan baby there, and asked nothing of the future except
that it allow him to marry this obstinate but fascinating little
creature at the earliest possible moment.  The question had been
brought up half an hour before, and he wanted it settled at once.
Harry wished they would decide about the marriage instead of fussing
around with an old mummy.

"My son, I venture to say that you would have been interested in this
young woman had you met her."

"Possibly," the youth admitted with a slight yawn.

"Yes," continued his father, busily searching for the mummy's right
wrist, "she was probably what you would call a peach."

"She may have been a peach in her day," thought Harry, "but today she's
a dried apricot."

The elder Marvin's searching fingers encountered a hard object.  It
proved to be a scarab, or sacred Egyptian beetle, carved in black
stone.

"Did you ever dream about that?" asked Harry, chaffing.

"Yes, I have," replied Pauline.  Both men looked at her to see if she
were serious.

"I dreamed that I was very sick and going to die, and an old man with a
long, thin beard came in.  He gave me a stone beetle like that.  Then
it seems to me they put it right on my chest and they said--let's
see, what did they do that for?  I think it was to cure me of something
the matter with my heart."

"Polly," said Mr. Marvin, "I never knew you had dreams like this.  But
are you sure they said it would cure your heart?  Wasn't it for some
other reason?"

Pauline thought a moment, while Harry lit a cigarette and his father
worked his fingers down toward the mummy's right wrist.

"No," said Pauline, "I remember now.  It wasn't to cure it at all.  It
was to make it keep quiet."

"Ho, ho!" laughed Harry.  "I never knew of any one making it flutter
much.  I guess that was no dream."

Harry's father silenced him with an impatient gesture and turned to
Pauline, who was watching the wind make cat's paws on the polished
surface of the Hudson River.

"Go on, girl, go on.  This is remarkable.  I have read of this custom
in the Egyptian 'Book of the Dead'!  Why did they want to keep your
heart quiet?"

"They said," continued Pauline, dreamily, "that after I died my spirit
was to be called before somebody--a God, I guess--who would judge
whether I was good enough for Heaven or not.  That stone beetle was
placed on my heart to make it keep silent and not tell anything wicked
I might have done in life.  Aren't dreams crazy things?  Say, Harry,
there goes a hydroplane."

The two young people hung out the open window.  The old man was
absorbed, too.  He had at last worked his fingers along the entire
length of the mummy's right wrist.  It was dry and hard as any mummy he
had ever seen, but it bore neither bracelet nor any ornament whatever.

"Well," he said, reluctantly, "it was all a dream, interesting but not
important.  Like Polly's dream, it was just the echo of something I
have read or seen."

"Oh, pshaw!  What are dreams, anyway?" muttered Harry, with
impatience.

"Dreams," said Pauline, authoritatively, "dreams are the bubbles which
rise to the surface of the mind when it cools down in sleep."

"Now," observed Harry, quietly, "when you and father are through
talking about mummies and dreams I wish you would consider something
that I am interested in.  I'd like to know how soon you are going to
marry me?"

"Where did you get that definition of dreams, Polly?" asked the old
man.

"From my story," said Pauline, proudly.

Both men at once remembered that she had gone to find the magazine and
show them her first story.  They eagerly demanded to see it.

Pauline picked up the Cosmopolitan from the floor.  She had dropped it
in her agitation at finding her foster father had fainted. Sure enough,
there it was:

FIRE ON AN OCEAN LINER

By Pauline Marvin.

It was not the biggest feature by any means, but it was quite a little
story, and there were several large stirring illustrations.  Both men
begged her to read it to them, but she modestly declined.

Mr. Marvin adjusted his spectacles and read it through from start to
finish, frequently looking up to compliment the authoress on some point
that pleased him.  Harry looked over his father's shoulder, and there
could be no doubt they were both held and even thrilled by the story.

Mr. Marvin clapped his hands and stated in a loud voice that he was
proud of her.  Harry expressed his appreciation by a bear-like hug and
a kiss, all of which she accepted with blushes and protests.

"And--er--did they actually pay you something for this?" asked the
old gentleman.

"Oh, yes," Pauline assured him.  "They sent me a check at once.  It
paid for that frock you told me was too extravagant."

"A hundred dollars?" ventured Harry from the depths of his ignorance of
things feminine.

Both Pauline and his father cast pitying glances at him.

"Look here, young man," said the elder Marvin, "whoever led you to
believe that you could buy dresses for a girl like Polly at a hundred
dollars?  If you contemplate matrimony on any such deluded basis as
that you had better back out now before it's too late.  Isn't that so,
Polly?"

"Why, father," protested the youth, "what do I care what her dresses
cost?  Polly knows everything I have or ever make is hers, and I can't
think of a more satisfactory way of spending it than on her."

"That's fine, Harry," laughed the father, "you have just the ideal
frame of mind and the proper sentiments for a modern husband.  You will
find, too, that women are very reasonable.  If a man gives his wife all
he makes, plus the vote, and lets her do just as she pleases--she'll
usually let him live in the same house with her, and even get up early
enough to see him at breakfast once in a while."

"I agree to everything," declared Harry, with the reckless abandon of
youth in love.  "But I want to know how soon Polly is going to marry
me."

Pauline, who had said nothing in answer to the preliminary skirmishes,
now recognized the main attack and opened up in reply.

"I told you I would marry Harry some time, but not for a year or two.
You admitted that a writer ought to see life in order to write well.
So there you are.  I must have a year or two of adventure.  There are a
thousand things I want to do and see before I settle down as Mrs. Harry
Marvin.  Suppose we say two years."

Harry staggered back as if from a blow.  Two years!  How preposterous!
He couldn't live that long without Pauline.  In vain he hurled his
protests and objections.  She stood, sweet, unruffled, sympathetic, but
as firm as the Rocky Mountains.  The old man listened to the debate for
some time without comment.  Then he pressed a button on his desk.

In answer came Raymond Owen, the secretary.  He had shown the good
taste to retire from the library as soon as the conversation became
personal.  From the vantage point of a room across the hall he had been
quietly listening, and decided it a rather unfruitful piece of
eavesdropping.  He appeared the faithful, deferent employee in every
line as he entered.

"Come here, Raymond," directed the old man, as sharply as a commanding
officer, "and you, Harry, and you, Pauline."

They obeyed and quickly lined up before his chair with rather surprised
faces, for Mr. Marvin only called them Pauline and Harry when he was
very serious.

"Raymond, this is the situation: My son loves Pauline and wants to
marry her at once.  I have no objection; in fact, I would like to see
them united at once, but Pauline demurs.  She loves Harry, but feels
she ought to have two years to see life before settling down.  Two
years is too much."

"I should say so," growled Harry.

"But, as my old grandfather, who has been gone these forty years now,
used to say: 'When a woman will, she will, and when she won't, she
won't--and there's an end on't.'  I don't blame her for wanting to
have her own way.  It's the only plan I've found to get along in this
world, but you can't have all your own way.  You have to compromise.
So Polly is going to have one year--that's enough.

"During that year, Raymond, I'm going to put her in your care.  You are
older and more prudent than either Polly or Harry and will see that she
comes to no harm.  Take her anywhere she wants to go--around the
world if she likes, to do anything within reason.  Do you agree?"

Mr. Marvin looked at Owen, who accepted the duty as calmly as if it
were an order to post a letter.  Polly also consented after a moment's
hesitation.  Harry alone protested and argued.  It was a hopeless case
and he yielded to overwhelming odds.

This matter settled, Mr. Marvin's mind returned to the mummy and his
curious delusion that it had come to life.  While Owen perused
Pauline's story and that willful young woman herself tried to cheer up
her disconsolate lover, the old man returned to the mummy.  He had
searched for the bracelet on the right wrist, but, after all, perhaps
the Egyptian might have slipped it onto her left wrist in her hurry to
get back.

"There it is," he shouted suddenly; "there it is--the bracelet.  She
wore it on her wrist and he told her to give it to Polly."

Mr. Marvin held in his hand a bracelet of scarabs linked together.  It
looked to him to the very one the reincarnated mummy had worn.  Harry
and Pauline in wonder came to him, and it was well they did.  The
excitement and exertion had again overstrained his failing energies.
He tottered, and they were just in time to save him from a fall.

It was another of his fainting spells, and they lowered him gently into
his chair.  But the old man was not unconscious yet.  Feebly he
repeated to Pauline, "Wear this bracelet--wear it always--promise."

Pauline promised, and slipped it on her wrist without more than
glancing at it.  The old man's eyes closed, and it was clear that this
faint was more serious than his others.  Harry, about to telephone for
Dr. Stevens again, was greatly relieved to see the physician stride
into the room.  There was hardly need of the stethoscope to tell him
the end was near.

Even before the old man was undressed and in bed, Dr. Stevens had
prepared and administered a hypodermic.  The patient's eyelids
fluttered and Dr. Stevens listened to the faintly moving lips.

"The will," called the doctor, "what about the will?"

He glanced at every one, but nobody knew.

A shadow of anxiety passed over the features of the dying millionaire.
Dr.  Stevens could see that something of serious importance was on the
old man's mind--something of importance about his vast property.

Once more he listened and then hastily drawing out his prescription pad
and fountain pen he wrote a few sentences at the dying man's dictation,
while the patient rallied and opened his eyes.  The physician held the
blank before his patient, who read it through and nodded.  Dr. Stevens
then placed the pen in the trembling fingers and guided his signature.
A moment more and the physician had signed it as a witness and the
butler had done the same.

The old manufacturer died as he had lived.

The will written on Dr. Stevens's prescription pad was given to Owen.
He went to his room and examined it.  It read:

"Bodley Stevens, M.D.  Rx:  I bequeath half my estate to my son, Harry,
the remainder to my adopted daughter, Pauline, to be held in trust,
until her marriage, by my secretary, Raymond Owen."

Then followed the signature of the deceased and that of the two
witnesses.  In vain Owen looked for the handsome bequest to "the
faithful secretary."  This was a bitter disappointment, and he
considered for a moment the advisability of destroying the will.  This
would make valid one of the earlier wills in which he knew he had not
been forgotten.

The folly of such a course became evident after a few moments thought.
Dr.  Stevens, the butler, and several others knew the contents of the
document.  It was so simple that its meaning could hardly be confused
or forgotten, and every one knew it was in his keeping.  It occurred to
Owen that quite likely such a hasty death-bed will written by a doctor
unskilled in law might not be accepted by the courts.

Early the next morning Owen suspended his work of answering telegrams
of condolence long enough to make a hurried trip to lower Manhattan,
where the late Stanford Marvin's lawyers had offices.

In vain the great lawyer cudgeled his brains for some flaw.  The will
ought to be wrong, but it wasn't.  The meaning was so clear that even a
court couldn't misunderstand it, and the fortune was left to his
natural beneficiaries.  The lawyer heaved a sigh and said plaintively:

"Too bad, too bad.  Why didn't they call me?"

"Then this will is not valid?" asked Owen.

"Oh, no, it will hold; but what a pity that such a great man's last
will and testament should be such an--well, so--well, this
instrument is not worthy of conveying such a great estate."

He contemptuously slipped the simple document into an envelope and
placed it in his safe.  Owen picked up his hat, but hesitated at the
door.  A question was forming in his mind and with it a hope.

"Mr. Wilmerding," he asked finally, "in case Miss Marvin does not marry
who would have charge of the estate?"

"I should say," replied the lawyer, "in reply to your question that the
estate would be held in trust by you."

Returning to the house and entering the library Owen was confronted by
the unwelcome spectacle of Montgomery Hicks, generally known as Mug.
Hicks, with his gaudy attire, and ugly face, was always an affront to
the eye, but to Owen he was a terror, for he held the power of
blackmail over the secretary.  Owen shrank at the sight of his enemy,
but immediately took courage.  Though Marvin's death had left the
secretary no legacy it had also robbed the blackmailer of his power.

Hicks advanced with what he intended to be a winning smile and extended
a hot, fat hand.

"I see the old man has croaked and I was just dropping in to talk
business," Hicks's newsboy voice growled out.

"Hicks," said Owen, keeping his hand in his pocket, "if you came here
to get your money out of the legacy old man Marvin was to leave me.
Well, you won't get it and you never will get it.  Marvin didn't leave
me a cent, so there is nothing for you to get.  He did leave me a job
in his will, a job that will last for a year, and neither you nor any
one else can force me out of that job.  You can't blackmail me any
more."

"At the end of the year what becomes of you?" asked Hicks.

"Then I get a position somewhere else; but that is none of your
business."

"You don't want a position, Owen.  A position calls for work.  You
don't like hard work any more then I do.  You can't stand work much
longer, either.  Look at your eyes and your skin, how many grains do
you take a day, anyway?"

"I haven't touched a grain of morphine in six months," lied Owen.  "But
get out of my way--you can't get anything out of me and you can't
blackmail me.  If you come to this house again I'll have you thrown
out."

"Just a minute," said Hicks, as pleasantly as he could, straining his
coarse features into the unaccustomed position of a smile.  "I didn't
come to get money out of you.  I know all about the will.  What I came
for was to help you and give you a tip.  You and I can make a lot of
easy money together.  You've got the opportunity and I've got the
brains.  Now, to show you I'm your friend, look at this!"

Hicks handed him a paper which Owen read with surprise.  It was a
receipt in full for all Owen owed.  Owen put it in his pocket.

"That's right, keep it.  You and I are going to be so rich before long
that a matter of a thousand or two wouldn't be worth talking about
between friends."

Owen had been under the thumb of this man, had feared and hated him and
hoped for the day when he might sneer in his face and defy him.  This
was the time, and yet he felt Hicks had something to offer.  He was in
temporary charge of millions.  There should be, there must be, some way
to make this control permanent or else to delve into these millions
while they were in his care.  As Hicks hinted, this was an opportunity
and he needed not brains, but rather experience and advice.  Owen had
been a rascal on a short time, why not take a partner like this man
Hicks?  He would prevent mistakes, and mistakes are all a criminal need
fear.

Owen fingered uneasily the paper Hicks had put in his hand.  He drew it
out of his pocket--yes, it was a receipt in full for all that Owen
owed the scoundrel.  What could be Hicks's scheme?  Owen turned a
puzzled and worried gaze upon his companion.

Hicks observed him closely, read the misgivings in Owen's mind and,
drawing close, whispered something in the latter's ear.

But Owen's drug-saturated nerves trembled at the thought.  He pushed
Hicks aside and walked rapidly out of the room, calling over his
shoulder:

"I won't have anything to do with you.  I don't want you to come near
me or speak to me again.  I'm done with you."

"When you want me you know where to find me," was Hicks's parting
answer.





CHAPTER III

PAULINE TAXES THE FIRST TRICK

"All right, I'll do it," growled Harry Marvin, with the air of a martyr
going to the stake.  "I'll do it for your sake, Polly."

"Well, you'd better begin to get ready," said Pauline blithely.

"I'll climb into a frock coat and endure an hour or two of this
afternoon tea chatter," promised Harry, "but first you must talk sense
with me for a few minutes."

"Oh, Harry," spoke Pauline, softly, "I know what 'talking sense'
means.  You want to argue about my year of adventure.  Now, lets not
argue.  Let's just be happy.  You know I love you and I know you love
me, and that ought to be enough.  This year will be gone before you
know it.  I'm going to begin it right away just to please you.  The
sooner it starts the sooner it will be over."

"Begin it?" said Harry.  "Why, a month of it is gone now.  But it's all
nonsense.  Polly, if you love me you are going to give up this crazy
idea."

A maid, bringing the card of Miss Lucille Hamlin, interrupted Harry.
She was the first of the afternoon tea party.  Polly hurried Harry off
to dress, and, of course, he had no further chance to "talk sense"
until the door had closed on the last guest.  Then he pounced upon
her.  But Pauline, sweetly stubborn, cheerfully unyielding, insisted on
carrying out her father's promise to the letter.

Raymond Owen, the secretary of the late Mr. Marvin, had thought it
important to overhear this argument, and finally to walk into the
library where the debate was going on.  If the adventures were to start
he had an idea for a beginning.  The words of Hicks, the blackmailer,
had been in his mind for some thirty days and were beginning to bear
fruit.  He had soon reached the point of hoping, almost praying,
something would happen to Pauline that he might be left in control of
her, estate.  During the last few days Owen had progressed, from merely
hoping to readiness to help his wish to come true.

Harry instantly appealed to the secretary to dissuade Pauline.  There
was no doubt that Owen had some influence over the girl.  In years gone
by, before Owen had taken to the drug, Pauline had sought him out in
many a time of perplexity and learned to rely on his tactful,
well-considered advice.

To the surprise of the young master of the house, Owen made no attempt
to dissuade.  Very unobtrusively he pointed out that for many years he
had been accustomed to carry out the wishes of Harry's father, and that
he was bound to fulfill his last wish in the same way.

"Raymond, you're a dear," laughed Pauline; "let's think of something
thrilling to do right off.  Have you any idea?"

"No," lied Owen, "I hadn't given the matter any thought. We might look
at a newspaper and see what's happening."

Owen had a paper with him and the three examined it together.

Owen pretended to discover that an aviation meet was about to be held.
His idea, for which Harry promptly hated him, was to induce some
aviator to take Pauline as a passenger.  Many of the races called for
carrying a passenger.  Harry made a few objections, but the speed with
which they were overruled showed that he had no standing in this
court.  So Harry subsided, but he thought very hard.

Several things were becoming evident to Harry.

One was that this year to see life and have adventures was actually
going to take place and no opposition on his part would stop it.  It
was also clear that if he hoped to control Pauline's adventures in any
way it would be by the use of his wits, matching them against Pauline
and the secretary.

When Pauline and Owen decided upon the aeroplane ride, Harry contented
himself with remarking that he would have to see about it.  Both
chuckled when he said it, Pauline outwardly and Owen inwardly.

Then they had dinner under the round glassy eye of Aunt Cornelia.  Aunt
Cornelia was an elderly maiden relative of Harry, who had arrived with
others for the funeral and made the brilliant discovery that since Mr.
Marvin's death the "social situation," as she termed it, at the Marvin
house had become impossible.

It seemed, according to Aunt Cornelia, that a young man and a young
woman of impressionable age living in the same house unchaperoned
constituted an "impossible social situation,"  Either Pauline or Harry
must move out or someone must be installed as chaperon. Of course, the
chaperon was the least of the three evils and Aunt Cornelia, being the
discoverer of the job, was elected to fill it.

Harry ordered a bottle of wine with his dinner.  Though he actually
drank very little, this unusual event created no little consternation.

"Harry, I didn't know you drank?" said Pauline.

"I am just beginning.  You see, now that I must take over father's
affairs and mix with men of the world I ought to get a little
experience in things.  See life and know what's what."

After dinner Harry casually asked if Pauline thought her adventures
would lead her to Paris.  Pauline thought it likely, whereat Harry
remarked that he might see her over there.

"I haven't been to Paris since I was a kid, and I really ought to see
it, don't you think?"

"Yes," agreed Pauline, without enthusiasm, "but wait until we are
married and we'll do Paris together."

"No, Polly, that won't do.  I'm sorry, but as you say, you can't see
life after you're married and settled down, so I'll have to do Paris
alone."

"Harry, are you sure you love me?" Pauline whispered.

"Polly, I know it, and everybody else knows it except you.  Get Owen,
he's a notary public, and I'll take an oath before him that you have
been the only girl in all the world, are now and ever will be, world
without end, amen."

"And I love you, Harry," said Pauline, lowering her eyes until he saw
only the silky lashes.

"Why, Polly, that's the first time you ever volunteered that
information."

"Yes, Harry, I love you too much to let you go to Paris."

"Paris can't hurt me unless I let it hurt me."

"Harry, you won't be quite the same sort of boy when you come back from
Paris.  Will you promise not to go until we are married?"

"Will you promise not to go on this trip of adventure?"

"Why should I?" demanded Pauline.

"Because you won't ever be quite the same sort of girl when you come
back."

After breakfast the next morning when the big touring car rolled up to
the front door to got Pauline and Owen, Harry was hurt that he had not
been consulted.  Pauline's belated invitation to go with them to the
aviation field in the automobile was declined.  Away went the big car
to the fine stretch of roads, where it made short work of the distance
to the aviation grounds.

Owen made a complete canvass of the "hangars" and soon accounted for
every machine entered in the race for the next day.  From all but one
of the aviators he obtained a flat refusal.  Not for money or any other
consideration would they take a strange woman as a passenger.  The only
exception was a Frenchman, whose hesitation in declining led Owen to
further argument.  At the last moment Pauline, impatient at the
suspense, entered the Frenchman's "hangar" and added her blandishments
to Owen's financial inducements.  The gallant foreigner succumbed and a
bargain was struck.  He exhibited his tame bird of steel and wood and
cloth with the utter pride of a mother showing off her only child.

The aviator's fingers touched one of the wires and the easy smile left
his face.  He turned to his mechanics and sharp words followed.  A
moment later one of his assistants was at work tightening the wire.
Owen's eyes scarcely left the wire, and when the opportunity arose he
questioned the mechanic as, to what would happen if that particular
steel strand should fail during flight.  The foreigner explained
frankly that the aeroplane would capsize and plunge to the earth.  But
he assured Owen that no such thing would happen, as he had just
tightened the wire in question and would make another inspection after
the practice flight that afternoon.

All the way home Owen's thoughts were of that wire and what it would
mean to him.  In the meanwhile Harry, after watching the car depart
toward Hempstead, concluded to follow.  He went to the picturesque
private garage behind the Marvin mansion and soon was, following in the
tracks of the bigger car.

Arrived on the field, he recognized Pauline's car and awaited patiently
until he saw it drive away.  Then he interviewed the aviator and
learned of the proposed trip on the morrow.  Harry's French was nothing
to boast of, nor was the Frenchman's English.  But they managed to have
a long and in the end a heated argument.  The birdman said he had given
his word to a beautiful lady, and that settled it.  Besides, there was no
danger in his wonderful machine.  Had he not flown upside down and done
all the things the great Pegoud himself had done?

"As you Americans say--let's see, what is your idiom?"

One of his mechanics prompted him:

"Ah, yes," he said, with a smile.  "I believe the proper expression is,
'I should worry.'"

Harry threw up his hands and went home.  As he buzzed his horn outside
the garage the door was opened by the Marvin chauffeur with a telegram
in his hand.  The chauffeur's wife was sick and he wanted a couple of
days' leave of absence.  Harry granted it instantly.  That evening he
made no mention of either the chauffeur's absence or his trip to the
field.  Pauline thought she was teasing Harry by saying nothing of her
plans.  She was sure he was eaten up with curiosity to know the result
of her visit and admired his ability, as she thought, to conceal it.

Owen spent a nervous evening.  He walked out soon after dinner and from
a drug-store telephone booth called up a friend in the insurance
business.  To the secretary's surprise and disappointment he learned
that the percentage of accidents to aviators had become comparatively
small.  Passengers were particularly fortunate.  The friend even agreed
to obtain accident insurance for any one at a reasonable premium.

If aeroplanes had become reasonably safe the chance of Pauline's being
killed during the flight on the following day was insignificant.  He
must give up all hope of wealth from the permanent control of her
estate.  As the evening wore on Owen began to feel how he had
unconsciously relied on this hope.  He doubled his evening dose of
morphine, but it neither soothed his disappointment nor brought him
sleep.

Hour after hour, during the night, his sleepless eyes seemed to see
that loose wire which the mechanic had explained to be so vitally
important.  He could see in imagination the machine flying off into the
clouds with Pauline in it.  He could see it suddenly waver, dip and
plunge to the earth.  In his mind's eye he saw himself rushing to, the
wreck, lifting out the girl's crushed form, wildly calling for a
doctor, and exulting all the time that she was beyond human aid.

About two o'clock Owen fell into a doze, and in that doze came one of
his vivid opium dreams.  He beheld Hicks enter his bedroom.  It was not
Hicks, the blackmailer, but Hicks, the counselor, who had told Owen how
he might become rich.  Hicks was speaking to him in a sort of noiseless
voice, very different from his usual tones.  He spoke in a sort of
shells or husks of words.  The consonants were there, but the vowels
were lacking.  Yet he heard as plainly as if the red-faced man had
shouted.  Hicks advised him to be a man, to show courage for once, to
risk something, and then reap the reward forever afterward.  "Take your
motorcycle, ride to the aviation field before daylight, file that wire
half through, and fate will take care of the rest."

But Owen lacked the nerve.  He feared that he would be seen sneaking
onto the field at night or at daybreak.  Hicks replied that the field
was deserted at this hour.  Owen then insisted that the aeroplane would
be guarded, and even if it were not locked in its hangar the first rasp
of a file on the wire would call the attention of some one on guard.
No, it was too much, Owen could not do it.  Instead, he made a counter
suggestion that Hicks should undertake the task, since he was so
certain of its success.  For his part the secretary agreed to divide
all that the estate might be made to yield him.

Owen, like everybody else, had seen many strange things in dreams, but
never had he known of any character in a dream admitting or even
suggesting that he was a dream.  Yet this was just what Hicks did.

"I would, Owen.  I would do it in a minute if I were talking to you.
But this isn't me at all.  I'm only a dream, in, reality I'm sound
asleep in a hotel on upper Broadway, where I am dreaming that I am
talking to you.  Tomorrow morning I'll remember enough of this dream to
make me go down to the aviation field with a sort of premonition that
Pauline is going to be killed in an aeroplane."

"How did you know about that wire and that she is going to fly
tomorrow," asked Owen.

"I don't know that," said the phantom Hicks frankly in his empty
voice.  "There is a third party in this and I don't know who he is or
much about him, except that he is not a living being.  He seems to be
somebody from the past, a priest of some old religion I ought to have
studied about when I was at school.  I don't know what his motive is,
but he is with us.  He wants her killed for some reason.  He brought
this dream of me to you so I could explain.

"You needn't worry about the man on guard over the aeroplanes.  That
man won't wake up, no matter how much noise you make."

"How do you know?" Owen asked.

"He knows," replied Hicks, "because he has transferred the effects of
your morphine from your astral body to his.  That's how he knows.  You
ought to know, too, because you have taken almost enough of the drug to
kill you tonight, and yet this is the first time you have even closed
your eyes.  You'd better let him help us and file that wire as he
advises.  I'm going now, you will wake up in a moment.  This priest man
told me after I had given you the message to drop this out of my hand
and the dream would end.  So here goes.  Goodbye."

Owen saw Hicks hold his hand over a table and drop a small black shiny
object upon it.  As it dropped Hicks vanished and Owen awoke.  He heard
a sharp snap and saw something black and shiny on the table.  For a
moment the secretary sat quietly in his chair staring at the table and
making sure that he was no longer dreaming.  Then he examined the black
object.  It was the scarab which old Mr. Marvin had removed from the
folds of the mummy.  An image of the beetle which Egypt held sacred,
carved in black stone.  Owen had not noticed the scarab before his
short nap and he could not account for its presence in his room
anyway.

A little later he donned his motor-cycling suit, tip-toed downstairs,
noiselessly went out by a back door and was soon trundling his big
two-cylinder motorcycle from the garage.  He was careful to push it out
of the Marvin premises onto the highway before lighting his lamp and
starting.

Arriving at the field just at dawn Owen found it as deserted as the
spectral Hicks had promised.  From the tool kit of his motor-cycle he
took two files of different shapes and a pair of pliers and walked
briskly and fearlessly over the uneven ground to the hangars.  All were
closed except one, and that one contained the French machine in which
Pauline was to ascend.  The secretary knew that this hangar would be
open.  He knew in advance that he would find a mechanic on guard and
sound asleep.

Whether real or unreal, awake or asleep, the business of the moment was
the filing of that wire.  Owen recognized it readily and found it not
to be a single wire, as he supposed, but a slender cable composed of
many strands.  These strands resisted his file and even the clipper
attached to his pliers.  After what seemed an hour's work he had
weakened or broken enough of the metal threads so that the cable
stretched perceptibly at that point to do more might cause the cable to
break at once and betray what had been done.

Owen hurriedly, returned to his machine had dashed back through the
beautiful morning air to the Marvin home.  Servants were stirring in
their rooms and the gardener was engaged in shaking some sort of powder
from a can onto a bare spot on the front lawn.  He glanced up at Owen
without surprise, for these early rides were known to be an old habit
of the secretary.

Owen took the machine to the garage, satisfied that there was nothing
guilty in his appearance or the gardener would have noted it.  Stepping
out of the garage he met Harry and could not help starting
perceptibly.  Harry looked him in the eye, and there was nothing for
Owen to do but stare steadily back.

"You are up very early, Owen," said Harry, looking at the dust on the
motor.

"Yes, I've been for a long ride.  I think the morning air does me
good."

"You don't look well, Owen.  Why don't you go to bed today.  I'll take
Polly to the meet."

"No, thanks.  I wouldn't miss seeing Miss Pauline fly," said Owen
firmly.





CHAPTER IV

OWEN WINS THE FIRST GAME

Harry Marvin entered the little private garage back of the Marvin
mansion, locked the door and drew the shades of the small windows.
There were only two automobiles in the garage.  One was the big six
cylinder touring car in which Pauline and Owen had made their trip the
day before to the aviation field.  The other was the two-seated
runabout that Harry had driven over the same ground just behind them.

Having made sure that nobody was about, Harry lifted up the hood of the
touring car and without the slightest provocation attacked it with a
wrench.  He removed the carburetor, took it to pieces, lifted out the
hollow metal float and deliberately made two punctures in it.  Then he
tossed the dismembered parts upon a work bench and was about to operate
on the runabout when he heard voices outside.

He was barely in time to unlock the door and be found busily working on
the car when Pauline entered.  She had just learned of the chauffeur's
absence.  Harry volunteered the additional bad news that the big car
was out of order.  Like every disappointed woman, she insisted on
knowing exactly what was wrong.  Harry told her, with many long
technical details, and, not knowing at all what he was talking about,
she had to be satisfied.

Could he fix it in time to get her to the aviation field before the
race?

Well, that depended partly on whether she would go away and not bother
him until breakfast.

Pauline could, and she certainly would refrain from bothering him.
Never before had Harry found her a bother, nor, for that matter, had
any other man in her recollection.  Out she went, with more color than
usual in her pink cheeks and the light of battle in her eyes.

"By George, I've got to play my cards carefully," thought Harry, as he
contemplated the runabout.  It was evident that he had designs on the
health of the two-seater also.  But he felt the necessity of subtlety
in this case.  He could not assassinate it boldly by tearing out a
vital organ as he had done to the bigger car.  This runabout must die a
slow, lingering death.  How was he to do it?  His first idea was to
weaken the tires and invite "blowouts" on the road.  But this could not
be done with certainty, and some kind friend might supply him with new
tires.

A more promising idea was to drain the engine of its oil, knowing that
sooner or later the pistons would run dry and stick.  Such a proceeding
would ruin the engine, and Harry was too good a mechanic to spoil a
first rate engine, especially one built by his father.  He would as
soon think of hamstringing a faithful horse.  A better plan soon came
to him and put him into action.  It soon had him flat on his back under
the car, boring a hole in the bottom of the gasoline tank.  When the
life-blood of the car began to trickle out in a stream he stopped the
hole with a small wooden peg.

The young man now frowned at the only remaining vehicle which had, not
received his attention, Owen's motorcycle.

Harry went to the hose used for washing down the cards and collected a
little water in the palm of his hand.  With the other hand he removed
the cap from the motorcycle's tank and allowed two or three drops of
water to mingle with the gasoline.

This done, Harry let down his sleeves, washed his hands, and sauntered
in to breakfast, with the unwelcome announcement that the big car was,
for the day at least, beyond human aid.

There was a flicker of suspicion in Owen's sallow face at the news.  He
wondered if Harry had disabled the touring car that he might ride alone
with Pauline.

"I am afraid," said Harry, quietly, "that you will have to ride in the
runabout alone with me, Polly.  It's rather hard on Raymond, but I
guess he must go on his motorcycle or by train."

"Oh, I think you wrecked it on purpose," said Pauline, without the
slightest suspicion that she was stating the truth.

Owen, worried by vague misgivings about Harry, looked into the tank of
the runabout to make sure that it was full, and then scurried away on
his two wheeled mount.  He considered waiting until the runabout was
ready to start and keeping the machine in sight, but it seemed wiser to
be on the field where he could make sure the Frenchman would not forget
his bargain nor start before Pauline arrived.

Pauline was ready with such record-breaking suddenness that it gave her
the novel experience of waiting for Harry.

She bad not forgotten that her lover had asked her not to bother him
while he worked on the car.  After that slight to her pride the young
lady would rather die than go near the garage while he was in it.
During the next five minutes unpleasant doubts entered her mind.  What
could this indifference and neglect mean?  She had looked upon Harry
ever since his return from college as a personal possession.  Of
course, technically he wasn't hers until she married him.  But if he
were not her property, at least she had an option on the handsome youth
until such time as she saw fit to either take his name or relinquish
him to some one else.  In that case she wondered to whom she would like
to turn him over.  There was her schoolmate and chum, Miss Hamlin.  How
lucky any man would be to get her, and Harry--how would he feel about
it?  Then, like a cold draught in her brain came the recollection that
Lucille and Harry had corresponded all the four years he was at
college.

Could it be that she, Pauline, had been too willful and headstrong with
Harry?  If so, was it possible that the keen edge of his adoration was
wearing dull?  Pauline had just succeeded in stamping these unpleasant
questions deep down into the subconscious parts of her mind when the
young man whisked up in the runabout.

Pauline's wrath melted rapidly.  Harry drove, as he did everything out
in the open air, magnificently.  His judgment of distances and openings
was precise, and his skill in weaving his way through heavy traffic was
startling.  A good looking young man is seldom seen to better
advantage, especially by a girl, than when driving a powerful car.
Pauline loved to drive with Harry.  Besides his spectacular tricks he
had a guileless manner of getting the better of arguments with crossing
policemen.

Harry was not driving as fast as usual.  This fact was impressed on her
by shouts and waving of hands from a car which passed them from
behind.

"That's Lucille," cried Pauline, waving.

"Yes, and, confound it, that's Billy Madison taking her to the races."

"Well, why shouldn't he?" asked Pauline.  "Isn't it all right?"

"Yes but it seems to me he is paying deal of attention to Lucille and
--say, Polly, you don't suppose she'd be silly enough to care for him,
do, you?"

That sensation of a cold wave in the back of her brain came again.

"I'm sure I don't know," she replied, a little coldly.  "Why--does it
matter very much to you?"

Harry hesitated, even stammered a little, in denying that it did.  He
stammered, as Pauline well understood, because he was not telling her
his true thoughts.  It did matter, and she knew it.  In reality it
mattered because Harry knew too much about young Madison to want him to
win the affection of any friend of his, but Harry did not wish to
explain.

"So Harry does care for Lucille and always has cared," thought
Pauline.  The sense of possession of the youth beside her faded and he
seemed far away.  If a man fears he is losing his grip on a girl he
redoubles his attentions and racks his brains to be more interesting
and attractive to her.  A girl in the same situation reverses the
tactics.

Just as Harry felt the absolute zero which scientists talk about
settling upon him, he remembered a very important duty.

"Seems to me we don't drift the way we ought to," said Harry, pressing
on his clutch pedal and trying to took concerned.

"I think we have been a long time getting to the aviation field," was
Pauline's chilly answer.

Harry stopped the car, went back and pulled out the little wooden plug
in the gasoline tank. Then away they went again, leaving a little wet
line in the dust of the road.  Pauline stared straight ahead.  Harry's
attempts at conversation fell on the stony ground of silence, or at
best brought forth only the briefest and most colorless answers.  Soon
Harry's practiced ear caught the preliminary warning of waning
gasoline, and a moment later, half way up a gentle hill, with a sob
from all its six cylinders the car gave up the ghost.

A few miles ahead Owen also was in difficulties.  He had been sailing
along merrily until he stopped at a little roadhouse for a drink.  The
machine had been all right when he got off and he knew nobody had
touched it, yet now it acted as if possessed by the evil one.  With
great difficulty he was able to start it, and once started it coughed,
bucked and showed all the symptoms of bronchitis and pneumonia.  By
dint of strenuous pedaling Owen helped the asthmatic motor to the top
of the next hill.  It ran as smoothly as a watch all the way down the
other side and then imitated a bunch of cannon crackers on the
following rise.

Owen was a good motorcycle rider, but a very poor mechanic.  His
machine had been adjusted, cleaned and kept in repair by the Marvin
chauffeur, and the secretary had seldom, cause to investigate it on the
road.  He had always used the carefully filtered gasoline from the
garage, so that he neither understood the present alarming symptoms nor
knew their simple cure.  His motor was protesting at a drop of water
which had entered the needle valve of his carburetor and, being heavier
than gasoline, had lodged there and stopped its flow. It would have
been an easy, matter to drain the carburetor, but instead Owen with
nervous fingers adjusted everything he could get his hands on, and
after two hours' work trundled it into a farmhouse and hired the farmer
to drive him the short remaining distance to the aviation field.

Several machines were in the air, but not the Frenchman's, when the
farmer drove up.  The roads and the edges of the field were alive with
cars and spectators as the secretary hastened to the "hangars."  The
French aviator welcomed Owen and inquired for the mademoiselle.  This
confirmed Owen's fears that something had happened to her on the way.
It had troubled him a little that the runabout had not passed him on
the road, but Harry might have made a detour to avoid some section of
bad road.

Owen lost another hour in watching and worrying before he made up his
mind to go to the rescue.  There were plenty of idle cars, but it was
not easy to hire one, as they were mostly guarded by chauffeurs with no
right to rent or lend them.  At last a man was found who was willing to
pick up $10 and take a chance that his master would not know about it.

The rescue car found them just where they had stopped, half way up the
hill.  Pauline had run the scale of feminine annoyance, from silence to
sarcasm, to tears.  The tears produced almost the same effect on
Harry's determination to keep Pauline from flying that the drops of
water had in Owen's carburetor.  The spectacle of the girl he loved
weeping had almost broken up his resolve when Owen dashed by, shouted,
turned around and drew up alongside.

Harry asked for help, and the chauffeur who had never had the pleasure
of tinkering with a "Marvin Six," was inclined to dismount and aid at
least in diagnosing the car's ailment.  While he was thinking about it
and surveying the parts which Harry had taken out and strewn about the
running board in his pretended trouble hunt Pauline had dashed away her
tears and transferred her pretty self to the new car.  Pauline and Owen
both knew there was barely time to reach the field before the
Frenchman's ascent.  So with scanty farewells Harry was left to
reassemble his car.  When he had set up the last nut he replaced the
little plug in the tank, produced a can of gasoline from the locker
behind the seats, emptied it into his tank and drove at reckless speed
for the aviation grounds.

He was just in time to see a tiny speck on the edge of the horizon.
This, he learned, was the Frenchman's machine.  He was told that it
carried a passenger.  The speck grew rapidly in size, developed the
insect shape of a biplane and soon seemed to be over the other end of
the aviation field.  The young man's joy at seeing the aeroplane
returning in safety was dampened by a little feeling of shame that by
such devious means he had almost spoiled Pauline's pleasure.

"I act like an old woman worrying Polly this way," he decided.  "No
wonder she is cross to me lately.  She must think I would be a tyrant
of a--"

Harry's last words were choked by a spasm of the throat.

There were shouts and gestures from the spectators.

A light gust of wind had struck the aeroplane on the right wing.  It
wavered an instant, like a dragon fly about to alight, and then instead
of responding to the aviator's levers turned on its left side and
plunged to the ground.  A cloud of dust arose, half hiding the wreck,
and then the crash of impact came to his ears.

There was a second of silence, broken by a groan.  Harry heard the
groan and didn't even know it came from his own throat.  He was in
motion now, forcing people to the right and left and running down the
field.  It seemed miles to the other end, and he was gratefully
conscious that others nearer were hurrying to the rescue, if rescue it
might be called.

The aeroplane had dropped like a stone from a height that forbade hope
of escape.  Would she be conscious and would he be in time to give and
receive a last message of love before her splendid young life was
quenched in the black blot of death?  Besides grief there was fury in
the runner's heart, wrath against Owen for encouraging this foolish and
dangerous caprice, against the unfortunate driver who had failed to
preserve his precious freight, and against nature who condemns every
living thing by one means or another to that same final failure and
wreck death.

Gasping for breath from his exertions, he was at last within a hundred
feet of the ruin, and saw people lifting up the engine and removing a
limp figure.  Just then two people stepped in his way.  He did not turn
out but rushed straight at them, rather glad to have something to burl
aside in his blind anger, nor did he notice that one was a woman.
Harry's plunge carried him between them and knocked both down, just as
he had often bowled over the "interference" in his football games.  On
he lurched, wondering vaguely at hearing his name called.  He heard it
again and it sounded like Pauline's voice.

He turned, and it was Pauline.

After all Pauline had arrived too late--had missed that fatal
adventure.

Owen watched Harry lift Pauline up and wrap her in his arms with a
squeeze that hurt.  But it was a hurt she loved and though she sobbed
as if her heart would break they were sobs of relief and happiness.

Owen watched a moment and then slunk away; his schemes had been for
nothing.  Pauline was alive and happy in her lover's arms, and the
secretary was no nearer his goal of permanent control of her estate
than before.  He walked to the entrance of' the tent and tried to learn
from the nurses and doctors who were hurrying in and out whether the
French aviator would live or die.  Nobody would stop to give him a
satisfactory answer.  There was a flap in the back of the tent, and
through this Owen cautiously peered.  He saw a nurse with something
that looked like wet absorbent cotton dabbing at a round black object.

Presently he saw that the round object was the head of a man blackened
by fire.  Just then the nurse looked up, saw Owen's guilty face and
gave a little exclamation of dismay.  At the same instant Owen felt a
hand grasp his elbow.  Withdrawing his head from the tent, he turned
quickly and was confronted by the red face of Hicks, the blackmailer,
counselor and dream messenger.

The secretary backed away from Hicks with a face of terror.

"Don't be scared," said Hicks in a hoarse whisper. "I feel as if I
were in this thing as deep as you are."

"In what thing?" asked Owen.

"Don't bluff, old man," said Hicks.  "Didn't you dream about me last
night?"

"Well, what have my dreams to do with you?"

"Stop bluffing," replied Hicks.  "Didn't you see me in a dream last
night?  And didn't I leave a black, shining stone on the table when I
left?"

Owen did not deny these questions, and the red-visaged man went on:

"I see you took my advice--that is, his advice, whoever he is, and
you fixed the wire."

"Look here, Hicks, in heaven's name, tell me what this means.  I did
dream about you; you told me to do the thing, and it's your fault.  You
admit you are in it.  Now, what is it?"

"Owen," said Hicks, "you and I are a couple of pikers in a big game--
bigger than we understand.  We hold the cards, but somebody else is
playing the hand for us.  He is an old guy and a wise one, four
thousand years old, he tells me, and, though it scares me out of my
boots to think who I am trailing along with, I'm going to stick and
you'd better stick, too, and let him play our hand to the end."

"Who is it?" asked Owen, wondering if the morphine had gotten the
better of him again or if Hicks were playing some uncanny deceit on
him.

"I don't know," replied Hicks.  "He's somebody who has been dead 4,000
years, and he wants to have this girl Pauline killed so he can get her
back.  I suppose he's some kind of ghostly white slaver.  It isn't our
business what he is as long as he takes care of us.  If we'll help him
he'll help us."

"Well, he didn't manage very well today," objected Owen.

"He planned all right," rejoined Hicks.  "The machine fell, and if
she'd been in it she'd have been killed.  But the other side played a
card.  I don't know what the card was, but it took the trick and she
didn't go up in the machine.  That's all.  But don't worry, we'll have
better luck some other time."

Owen shook his head.  He could make nothing of this battle of unseen
forces.  It was clear to him that he had grasped at the one big chance
to get Pauline's estate and had missed it.  He told Hicks so frankly.

"That's where you're wrong again," insisted Hicks.  "If that girl had
been killed today it would have been a big blunder."

"A blunder?" queried Owen.  "Didn't you say that Pauline must be put
out of the way before we can get hold of her fortune?"

"Listen," said Hicks glancing cautiously about, "come over here away
from these people."

"What do you mean by saying that it would have been a big blunder if
Pauline had been killed in that flying machine?" demanded Owen.

"Yes, an almighty big blunder--that's what I said, and I can tell you
why.  We were pretty stupid not to think of it before.  Now here's
what's got to happen to Miss Pauline--"

Hicks placed his mouth close to Owen's car and whispered.





CHAPTER V

THE PIRATE AND PAULINE

A sort of  false quiet, like the calm that broods between storms, kept
all serene at the Marvin mansion for a week after the aeroplane
catastrophe.  Little had been seen of Harry, who was busy with
directors' meetings and visits to the factories.  Owen had read with
alarm of rumors that some one had tampered with a wire of the wrecked
biplane.  But if the authorities were investigating he saw no signs of
it, and suspicion pointed no finger at him.

What puzzled and worried Owen more than anything else was his own mind
and behavior.  Having no belief in the supernatural, he could not
account for the dream which had thrown him into a criminal partnership
with Hicks.  Hicks had blackmailed him in the past, and there was
nobody he had feared and hated more than this vulgar and disreputable
race track man.  Yet Hicks had appeared to him in a dream, and Owen had
promptly done his bidding, involving himself in what would probably
turn out to be murder.  The newspapers reported the French aviator as
barely living from day to day.

Owen suffered the torment of a lost soul, but, at least he had no more
dreams, or spectral visitations.  Hicks called him on the telephone
once or twice, but the secretary refused to talk.

Pauline, too, had a busy week.  Besides her usual social activities,
she rewrote and finished her new story.  It seemed to her even better
than the one in the Cosmopolitan Magazine.

"This will surely be taken," Pauline thought with a little sigh of
regret, "and that means the end of my year of adventures--"

She had determined on this course the night after the accident.  It was
after midnight, and Pauline was trying to marshal the exciting
recollections of the day into the orderly mental procession that leads
to sleep.  Very faintly she heard what sounded like the music of a
distant mandolin.  Pauline knew it was Harry, went to the open window
and looked down on the dark lawn.  There he was playing with a bit of
straw instead of a pick that his music might not disturb the sleepers
in the house.

Pauline wanted to throw her arms around him and promise not to cause
any more worry.  But she didn't, because she couldn't reach him from
the window.  After Harry had gone Pauline decided to finish her story,
send it to a publisher and let his decision be hers.

"If they accept it, you stay home and marry Harry," she told the pretty
face under the filmy night cap which smiled at her from the mirror.
"But if they dare reject it, Harry will have to worry, dear boy though
he is."

So Pauline lost no time in finishing and submitting her manuscript,
inclosing a special delivery stamp and a request please to let her know
at once.

On Saturday Pauline received a bulky letter in the morning's mail.  It
was her neatly typed manuscript and a short letter declining her
story.  The editor thought it charming, showed wonderful imagination,
gave great promise of future success, but there was a lack of
experience evident throughout--a little unreal, he added.  He
ventured to suggest that the author would do well to travel around and
see the world from different angles.  During the afternoon Harvey
Schieffelin dropped in for a call.  He had found her story in the
Cosmopolitan and complimented her then he began to laugh.

"Polly, that's a bully story of yours, but you ought to have gone down
and watched some stokers do work before you described that scene."

"What was wrong in my description?" demanded the young authoress.

"Well, you told of a stoker laying his grimy hand on the fire door and
pulling it open to rake the fire."

"Well, couldn't he do that?"

"Oh, yes," laughed Harvey, "he could, but he wouldn't do it more than
once.  Those doors are almost red hot and would bum the flesh off the
stoker's hand, whether it were grimy or not.  I'll show you on my yacht
some time.  What you need is--?"

"Harvey, don't you dare tell me I need experience," interrupted Pauline
with unexpected heat.  Young Schieffelin saw that tears were almost in
her eyes.

"Well," thought Schieffelin, "this vein leads too close to water," and
he hurried to shift the course of the conversation.

But the damage was done.  Pauline took her story to the little open
fireplace in her room and destroyed it.  At the same time she
destroyed, her resolution to give up the year of adventure.  There
could be no question, she needed experience.  Her adopted father had
admitted it, the editor had said it, and even an empty-headed young man
like Schieffelin could see it.  She was sorry for Harry, but it
couldn't be helped.  She picked up a copy of "Treasure Island" and soon
wished fervently that the days of pirates were back again.

Owen gave up his fight against morphine late Friday night.  Saturday he
was at peace with the world.  Gone were all the nerve clamorings and
with them went his scruples.  All day he kept a furtive watch upon
Pauline, and even heard her envious remarks about pirates to Harry when
he returned for a weekend at home.  Owen sympathized with Pauline in
her regret that pirates were extinct.  A pirate would have been very
useful to the secretary just then.

However, there were other cut-throats, plenty of them, and perhaps some
other kind would do.  There were gunmen, for instance, but, an honest
District Attorney had lately made these murderous gentlemen of the
underworld almost as quiet as pirates.  He was still pondering when
Hicks called again on the telephone.  This time the secretary responded
and made an immediate appointment in a cafe near Forty-second street.

Owen related the events of the week, ending with Pauline's hankering
for pirates.  The two men got their heads together and rapidly evolved
a plan.

From the cafe they took a taxi and rode along the water front, first on
one side of the island of Manhattan and then on the other.  The cab
stopped near the worst-looking saloons, while the two schemers entered
and looked over the sailors and longshoremen refreshing themselves at
the bars.  After covering several miles of water front they had
collected as many as a dozen abominable barroom cigars and a few
equally dubious drinks, but had not yet found what they were looking
for.

On Front Street they saw a man, and both cried out:

"Look, there he is."

The man was a wild-looking specimen.  He had the rolling gait of the
deep sea.  A squinting eye gave him a villainous leer, while a bristly
beard and long gray hair made him a ferocious spectacle.  His age was
doubtful, as the lines in his ruddy skin might have been cut by
dissipation as much as age.  The most prominent feature of his unlovely
countenance was a nose, fiery red from prolonged exposure to sunburn,
or rum-bum.

"If he isn't a pirate he ought to be one," said Owen.

The man carried the top of a ship's binnacle, as the round brass case
which holds a ship's compass is called.  He entered the dismal portal
of a marine junk shop.  The taxi was stopped discreetly a block away.
As Owen and Hicks approached the shop they heard a loud argument going
on inside.

"How much do you want for it?"

"Ten dollars.  It's a brand-new Negus."

"Ten nothing.  You stole it, you son of a sea cook.  I'll give you a
dime for it."

"I did not steal it, so help me ---- ------!  The captain of that
'lime juicer' over in the North River gave it to me for saving his
little gal's life. He begged me to take anything I wanted, but I
fancied this.  I'll tell you about it."

Then Owen and Hicks, listening just outside, heard a fearful and
wonderful tale.  To relate it in the sailor's own words, stripped of
the long deep-sea oaths, would be as impossible as to pick the green
specks out of a sage cheese.

In brief, the gentleman with the binnacle, sauntering innocently along
the docks Friday night, had heard a commotion on the British tramp
which he referred to as a "lime juicer."  Some fifteen or more
long-shoremen had invaded the ship, overcome the captain, tied him down
and were about to kidnap his daughter.  The teller of the story had
walked in and thrashed them all single-handed, driven them off into the
darkness, rescued the little girl and released the captain.  In
gratitude the commander had made him a present of the binnacle head.

At the conclusion of the story there was a pause, then the other voice
answered:

"You're a wonder.  As I said before, I'll give you ten cents for the
binnacle and ninety cents for the story.  Now you can take it or I'll
have you pinched for swiping it."

"Gimme the dollar," said the hero of the tale, and a moment later he
passed down the street with the two eavesdroppers at his heels.

The sailor man, proceeding at a rapid pace, suddenly turned a comer
like a yacht jibing around a buoy and plunged into a dingy saloon.
Owen and Hicks went in after him.

Owen ordered and invited the sailor to join them.  They learned that
his name was Nelson Cromwell Boyd, that he had deserted from the
British navy at a tender age, and since then had been through a series
of incredible adventures and injustices, which disproved the old adage
that you can't keep a good man down.

At last Owen intimated that he had a business proposition to discuss,
and they adjourned to the sidewalk.

"Do you want to earn some money?" asked Hicks.

"Well, that depends," said Boyd, doubtfully.

"Easy money," suggested Owen.

"That's the only kind worth going after," commented the sailor.

"That's where we agree with you, my friend," said Hicks.  "We are after
easy money and plenty of it.  Plenty for us and plenty for you, too, if
you can keep quiet about it."

"That's the kind of talk I like to hear.  But as honest man to honest
man, I want to warn you that there mustn't be too much work to it.  I
don't believe in the nobility of labor.  I believe that work is the
crowning shame and humiliation of the human race.  It's all right for a
horse or a dog or an ox to work, but a man ought to be above it. It's
degrading, interferes with his pleasures and wastes his time."

"I feel the same way," agreed Owen, "but somebody has got to work to
make shoes and food for us."

"Yes," admitted the sailor, "regretfully there will always have to be
some work done, and I'm sorry for the poor guys that must do it.  But
there's been too much work done."

"Those sentiments are very noble," said Owen.

"It's all very fine to worry about your fellow man.  But you would like
to have plenty of money even  if the rest of the world is fool enough
to keep on working."

"I suppose so," said the sailor, "but I'm a reformer and my business is
to talk, not work."

"That's just what we want you to do," said Owen and Hicks in answer.

Then they found a table in the rear of a saloon where they could unfold
their plan.

Boyd was to be introduced to a foolish young girl who had a barrel of
money.  He was to tell her a deep-sea yam along certain lines, and Owen
and Hicks would take care of the rest.

"The question is," said Owen, "whether you can talk and act like a sort
of reformed pirate."

"Leave that to me," he assured them, and led the way out of the saloon
and into still another grimy and disreputable place.  It was Axel
Olofsen's pawnshop and second-hand general supply and clothing store.

After much pawing over ancient, worn and rusty weapons, Boyd was at
last fitted out.  Ole was paid about sixty per cent of what he asked
and left to the enjoyment of his Scandinavian melancholy.

"You look like a pirate now, sure enough," said Owen, observing Boyd's
effect on the driver of the taxicab.

"I look it, but I don't quite feel it yet," said Boyd, with deep
meaning.  "There is something lacking."

"What can it be?" asked Hicks.

"About three fingers of red-eye," the sailor explained, pointing to a
saloon.  "That will make my disguise just perfect."

In the saloon Hicks and Owen made a little map, wrinkled it and soiled
it on the floor, then gave it to the pirate.

"Tell her," said Owen as he called for a taxi, "that it is only a copy
of your original, which is all worn out."

The nearer they approached to the house the more talkative became the
"pirate." He demanded to know more details of what was to be done, and
finally assumed an air of authority.

"You say that rich girl is crazy to see something worth writin' about?
Now, I know something better than pirates and buried treasure," shouted
the pirate confidently.

"Yes, no doubt," Owen replied soothingly and with some alarm at the
man's bravado.  "But it's pirates she is interested in just now."

"Never mind, I say I know something better," insisted the pirate.
"If she will go and do what I'm goin' ter tell yer she'll sure see
something like she never dreamed of.  Now listen to me sharp!"

It was an extraordinary proposition the "pirate" made.

Owen laughed a gentle discouragement and shook his head, but Hicks
fixed his eyes keenly on the man and was evidently turning the
suggestion over in his mind.

Owen's key admitted the three to the front hall without ringing, but a
maid happened to cross the hall and caught sight of Boyd.  With a
scream and a flutter she retreated.  Owen seated his two confederates
in the hall and went in search of Pauline.

Owen found Pauline alone in the library. Never did a villain propose a
scheme to a beautiful girl at a more favorable moment.  Half the
afternoon and a little while after dinner she had been absorbing
"Treasure Island," and now came Owen asking her if she would like to
meet a reformed pirate and go on a thrilling and adventurous
expedition.

"Owen, you are a perfect angel. Bring in your pirate.  I'm sorry,
though, that he has reformed."

Pauline shook hands with Hicks, but hardly noticed him.  She had eyes
only for the "pirate," who impressed her mightily.  With awe and
admiration she saw his scowling and squinting eye run over her and then
travel about the room.  Pauline approved of the "pirate," but the
"pirate" did not approve of Pauline, and he almost told her so.

But he met the warning eyes of his confederates and restrained
himself.  He had his story to tell and he would do it.  After all, that
was the best way to attack this girl and her fortune.

"Tell us about the treasure," said Pauline eagerly.

"Hush!" he shouted in a voice that made the girl jump.

"I'll tell you, but, by the blood of Morgan, if one of you ever tells a
living soul I'll cut his liver out," said the "pirate."  Pauline
gasped, and the secretary told him that it wasn't considered good
manners to point with a sharp knife.  But they all swore to secrecy and
the "pirate" proceeded:

"I was but a slip of a lad when I ran away and sailed from Liverpool in
the good brig Nancy Lee with as villainous a crew as I ever seen.
Where we was bound for and why is none of your business.  Them that
planned that voyage has cashed in their souls to their Maker and--ah,
well, as I was saying, they was a villainous crew, low and vile and
bloody-minded.  I was the cabin boy and slept on the transoms in the
captain's cabin.  The weather was awful and the grub was worse.

"But all went well till we reached the roarin' forties.  The skipper
knew how to handle sailors, you bet he did.  When they came aft to kick
about the grub he knocked 'em down before they said two words."

Pauline gave a little exclamation of dismay at this point and the
"pirate" turned to her in explanation:

"You see, knockin' 'em down quick like that avoids a lot of cross words
and unpleasant arguments such as makes hard feelin's on long voyages.

"Yes, as I was saying', all went well until the second mate got to
knockin' 'em out with his left hand, which the same was all right, too,
but he was heard to pass a remark one day that he only hit landlubbers
with his left hand.

"The crew they was insulted, and that very night the second mate went
overboard.  Who done it nobody knows, leastways the captain couldn't
find out.  It made the old man peevish like and he got to arguin' with
them sailors instead of wallopin' 'em the way he oughter done, and one
day they turned on him.

"It was all over in a minute.  They had the old man thrown and tied.
The first mate came runnin'in, firin' his pistols, but they downed him,
too.  I took the wheel while they decided what to do.  'Bloody Mike,'
their leader, had about persuaded the men to send the captain and mate
to Davy Jones's locker and the carpenter was riggin' the plank for 'em
to walk when I up and puts in a word.

"I pleaded for their lives and, though Mike was dead agin' the idea,
they voted to let them live.  The last we saw of 'em they was driftin'
off in the jolly boat with a jug of water and a loaf of bread."

The mariner paused and Pauline suggested delightedly:

"And as soon as they had cooled down they were grateful to you and made
you their leader?"

"They did not," answered the "pirate."  "They broached a cask of rum in
the forward hold, and I overheard 'em plotting to throw me to the
sharks."

"How awful," said Pauline.

"Yes, miss," agreed the "pirate."  It was awkward and embarrassing like
for a mere slip of a lad. So I up and goes into the captain's cabin and
gets all the pistols and knives and cutlasses there was and brings 'em
out on deck.

"Pretty soon them drunken devils come a-tumblin' out of the fore hatch,
picks up half a dozen capstan bars and some belyin' pins and a marlin
spike or two and runs aft a-hollerin' and yellin'.  I gives 'em one
warnin' and then fires."

The "pirate" stopped, coughed and looked around.

"Oh, please go on," begged Pauline.

"Yes, miss," replied the sailor, "but this talking affects my throat.
Could you possibly--?"

"Why, certainly," interrupted Owen, "I'll get you a drink."

After the sailor had swallowed the biggest drink ever poured out in
that house he continued:

"Yes, that was as neat a fight as I ever was in.  There was some twenty
of 'em all told."

"And what happened then?" demanded Pauline.

"Well, Miss, it come on to blow, and there was the old ship staggerin'
along under full sail.  It was all I could do to keep the old hulk from
foundering', at that, but I stuck to the wheel day after day and night
after night.  To keep from freezin' I had to drink a lot of grog.  Oh,
a powerful lot of grog.  So much grog that I've been dependent on it
ever since--and I'll take a little now, if it's agreeable."  It
wasn't exactly agreeable, but he got it and continued.  "Finally we
fetched up, ker-smack, on the rocks of a desert island.  All the boats
had been smashed and carried away by the storm, so I had to build a
raft.  The first two loads was all provisions, and then I took the
treasure ashore--"

"What treasure?" asked Pauline.

"Oh, bless your heart, didn't I tell you about the treasure?"

"No," said Hicks, with a scowl, "and that's the part we want to hear
about."

"Oh, money ain't everything," rebuked the "pirate" in a lordly manner.
"There was a matter of a million dollars or so in good British gold,
and what it was on the 'Nancy Lee' for is nobody's business.  I took
it all ashore, an' buried it on the island.  Here's a copy of the chart
I made, and you three is the first to lay human eyes on it."

While Pauline examined reverently the dingy bit of paper the "pirate"
concluded his yarn.

"After I'd buried the last f it, I rigged a mast on the raft and
fetched up on one of the Bahamas."

"And you have never been back to get the gold?" queried Pauline.

"No, miss; though I've started many's the time.  But a poor seafarin'
man like me finds it hard to fit out a proper expedition.  If you fancy
the notion and want to go along with me and pay all the expenses I'll
divvy up half and half with you.  What do you say?"

Pauline looked at Owen and Hicks, who nodded approvingly.  She had no
great faith in finding any gold.  Old Mr. Marvin had said that treasure
bunts rarely produce any results.  But he had also remarked that they
were very thrilling, and here, surely, was adventure well worth a
little time and money.  Pauline agreed, and the "pirate" was in the
midst of imposing a blood-curdling oath of secrecy when Harry demanded
admittance.

Nobody, least of all the sailor, would tell him what was in the wind,
except that they were going off on a trip of adventure.  The young man
disapproved of both Hicks and the "pirate," and the latter showed his
dislike of Harry.  It was with regret that the man of the sea
recollected Owen's stipulation that Harry must on no account be allowed
to go with the party.  Nothing would have pleased the "pirate" better
than to have got these two happy and innocent representatives of
"ill-gotten gains" alone with him on the high seas.  Pauline, too,
wished to have Harry who was frowning and suspiciously demanding
information.  But she had sworn the oath of a buccaneer, and far be it
from her to break faith with the confiding freebooter.

So, once more Harry was kept out of Pauline's councils.  He was a
little provoked at her this time, for her willfulness seemed almost
perverse after the lesson she should have learned from the aeroplane
wreck.






CHAPTER VI

THE TREASURE HUNTERS

Excitement and activity pervaded the house.  Sunday and Monday every
one, including Harry, soon knew that Pauline was to take Tuesday's
steamer to Old Nassau, in the Bahamas.  Harry intended to quietly board
the steamer a little earlier than Pauline and surprise the party by
appearing after the ship was well out to sea.  His plans were'
shattered by the young lady's unexpected "early arrival."  Harry, with
a suitcase in each hand, met her face to face on the pier.  There was
nothing for him to do but confess, kiss her goodbye and go.  It was
with a pang of regret that she saw him toss his two suitcases covered
with college team labels into a taxicab and depart.

An hour later the four treasure hunters stood looking over the rail
watching the last passengers come aboard.  The "pirate," in a new blue
suit, huge Panama hat and light pink necktie, though a rather unusual
sight, had been toned down in appearance to a degree that permitted him
to walk about among people without causing a crowd to collect.  Hicks,
too, at Owen's suggestion, had adopted quieter attire.

Just as the gangplank was about to be pulled in the deckhands waited to
permit a very feeble and bent old man to hobble aboard.  He had long,
white hair, and his face was mostly gray whiskers, except a pair of
dark spectacles.  A porter followed him bearing two brand new
suitcases.

The adventurous four were soon comfortably perched in steamer chairs
watching New York harbor slip by them.  They had barely reached the
Statue of Liberty when the "pirate" launched forth on one of his
Munchausen-like tales of the sea.

Highly colored, picturesque, untrue and absurd as a stained glass
window, nevertheless these yams took on a semblance of reality from the
character of the narrator himself.  In all his stories the "pirate" was
the hero.  Nobody noticed that a steward had placed a fifth steamer
chair beside the sailor until that worthy reached one of the main
climaxes of his narrative.  At that point he felt a hand on his
shoulder and looked around into the whiskers and black spectacles of
the old passenger.  The cackling voice remarked:

"It's a lie.  It's a lie.  It's a lie."

Every one was astonished, but even the "pirate" had a trace of respect
for such great age, and said nothing in reply.  After a while he
continued, only to be interrupted by the same words.

This was too much to endure, and though the if  "pirate" held his
tongue they rebuked the old dotard by walking away and leaning over the
rail.  The conversation wandered to the subject of sharks, and Pauline
asked if they were as stupid as they looked.

"Don't you believe it," the "pirate" assured her.  "Them sharks look
stupid just to fool you.  Why, I remember a time not so long ago down
in Choco Bay, on the coast of Colombia, there was an old devil who used
to sneak up alongside sailin' vessels in a fog.  He carried in his
mouth the big iron shank of an anchor he'd picked up from the wreck."

"What did he do that for?" asked Hicks.

"So the iron would deflect the compass and make them run the ship onto
the Kelp Ledges, off the Pinudas, Islands.  If a ship went down he
stood a good chance of eating one or two o' the passengers.  But I
don't mind sharks.  If you want to know what really annoys me, it's
them killer whales in the Antarctic that come a crowdin' and buttin' up
against ye."

"It's an internal, monumental, epoch-making lie," cackled a voice
behind him.  Every one looked, and there was the old man.

The "pirate" was now thoroughly exasperated.  If he couldn't tell a
story without being interrupted in this manner life wasn't worth
living.  He announced that he would find the old man and thrash him.
Owen and Hicks were annoyed, but they feared the result of the sailor's
fury.  They might all be arrested on arriving at Nassau.  This would
interfere with plans, and must not be thought of.  To appease the
wrathful "pirate" Owen offered to have the old man thrashed so soundly
that he would probably be glad to stay out of sight the rest of the
voyage.

There were some rascally looking men of Spanish blood among the second
cabin passengers who, as Owen and Hicks observed, looked needy and
unscrupulous.

The secretary found no great embarrassment in explaining that he wished
the old man thrashed quietly and privately.  The Spaniards agreed to
beat him thoroughly for the trifling consideration of ten dollars.
They would even throw him overboard for a very reasonable sum
additional.  But the bargain was struck at ten dollars for a moderate
beating, and the foreigners were warned that as he was delicate they
must be careful not to kill him.

During the next hour or two the old man passed the four treasure
hunters in their steamer chairs, but each time the "pirate" ceased
talking before he came within earshot.

At last the old man stopped in front of Pauline and gazed long at the
"pirate." He studied the rascal's face, apparently trying to remember
the identity of the man.  Slowly the aged head nodded as if he was
saying to himself.  "Yes, he is the same man."

Then, turning to Pauline and shaking a warning finger, the old man
delivered a surprising message.

Pauline was startled.  The three men leaped to their feet.  It was with
the utmost difficulty that she was able to prevent violence.. Owen
excused himself to hunt up his Spaniards and demand an explanation for
their slowness.  To his surprise they declared that they had tackled
him and that he was as quick and powerful as a gorilla.  He had
thrashed them both and they were glad to escape with their lives.

The ex-secretary was incredulous, but they showed cuts and bruises and
demanded their money, saying that a joke had been played on them.  When
Owen refused one of them drew a stiletto and the ten dollars was
forthcoming.

Returning, ruefully, he related the failure of the Spaniards.  The
"pirate" at once said:

"Now, let me handle him."

A few moments later Boyd cornered his ancient adversary on a deserted
and wind-swept piece of deck.

"Old man," snarled the "pirate," "you say all my stories are lies.
Only your gray hairs have saved you from a thrashing before this."

"If it's my gray hairs that stop you, I'll remove that obstacle."

The "pirate" was amazed to see the aged person take off his hat and
remove a gray wig with his left hand while his right fist collided with
the "pirate's" eye.  When consciousness returned he was lying on the
deck with no living thing in sight but a seagull aeroplaning on slanted
wings over his head.  His return to the party was more rueful than
Owen's.

"What is the matter with your eye, Mr. Boyd?" asked Pauline
innocently.

"Why, you see," said the "pirate," "I was looking at a girl with one of
these new slit skirts and I stumbled and bumped against a ventilator."

"I see," commented Owen to help him out.  "You sort of slipped on a
sex-appeal, so to speak."

"Yes," said the sailor, gratefully.  "It was just like that."

"It's a lie," said a high, thin voice from somewhere, and they noticed
that a porthole behind them was open.

Pauline found conversation difficult.  Hicks, as a man of few words,
which gave him an undeserved reputation for wisdom.  The "pirate" had
given up spinning yams on account of the old man's unfailing
interruption.  Owen's mind, too, was preoccupied with a growing
suspicion.  So the adventurous young lady went to her stateroom and
wrote a letter to Harry.

The sailor intimated that he had important news which could be only
told in the privacy of Owen's stateroom.  The secretary suspected this
to be only a maneuver on the "pirate's" part to get acquainted with the
whiskey he knew Owen kept with him.  But the seafarer unfolded the tale
of his black eye not truthfully nor accurately, except in that he had
recognized Harry under the disguise of the old man.

"I more than half suspected it," said Owen, "and I have been watching
his stateroom.  But there is no way any one can see into his room
unless by getting a look in through the porthole."

"And there's where you get a good idea," said the "pirate."

"But there's no good having a peep' at him without his disguise now
that it's Harry," objected Hicks.

"No," said the "pirate," turning on Owen his lusterless sea-green eyes,
faded by much grog to a dimness that reminded one of the faint lights
set in ships' decks and known as "dead-eyes."  "No, but your porthole
idea is just the scheme to get at him and get rid of him.  I can slip
down a rope tonight when all is quiet and the fool passengers are over
on the other side looking at the bloody moon."

"And then what?" said Owen.

"I goes down the rope and shoots the old fool!  I mean the young fool
--through the porthole."

"Why, that's murder!" cried Owen.  "We'd all swing for it."

"No, it ain't murder; it's suicide, 'cause I'll throw the gun in there
where they'll find it when they break the door in, and everybody'll
think he shot himself."

"It's practical," commented Hicks, but Owen protested.  At last it was
decided that a fourth man was necessary to do the shooting, and the
"pirate" volunteered to produce him.

"There's an old shipmate o' mine down in the stoke hole working like a
nigger.  He'll be glad to do the trick for ten dollars, but we'll make
it fifty because the poor fellow has a wife and children and needs the
money.  I'll go get him."

Owen and Hicks went on deck while Boyd descended to the fiery vitals of
the steamer.  It is not an easy matter to smuggle a grimy stoker from
his furnace to the upper passenger decks, but the "pirate" managed it.

Meanwhile Harry was not losing time.  He had taken a dictograph from
his baggage, borrowed a few dry batteries and a coil of wire from the
wireless operator.  He carefully installed the instrument in his
stateroom, and led the wires out under his door to the passageway.
From there it was an easy task to carry them along the edge of the
carpet to the door of Owen's stateroom.  Arrived at the point, he was
compelled to leave pliers, wire and the receiving instrument under a
chair.

Like many another stateroom door, Owen's could not be locked easily
from the outside, so when the three conspirators went out they left it
unlocked.  The old man slipped in a moment later and quickly placed the
dictograph under the lower bunk.

Returning to his own room, the old man took up his instrument and
listened.  But he was not a very expert electrician and the dictograph
for a long time failed to give anything but roars and crackling sounds,
though he was convinced there were several persons talking.  A last he
got the thing adjusted in time to catch the last sentences of the
conversation.  He recognized the voice of the "pirate."  It said:

"An then we lowers you down the rope to his porthole.  You sticks your
gun in and shoot the old fool.  Don't forget to throw the gun in
afterward, so they'll think he killed himself.  See?"

"Sure, I got yer, matey," replied a strange voice.

After this the dictograph must have got out of order as nothing further
came over the wire.

After closing the porthole Harry started to take off his disguise with
a view of revealing himself and having Owen, Hicks and the "pirate"
arrested.  Then it occurred to him that he had not heard Owen or Hicks
talking and very likely they were not in the room at all.

It was probably a crazy, drunken scheme of the old sailor whom he had
tormented.  Neither Owen nor Hicks had any suspicion, so far as he
knew, that behind the whiskers and eyeglasses was Harry.  Owen could
have no object in shooting him.

"Can it be that I am jealous of this man Owen?" he wondered.  "Polly
has been taking his advice against mine lately.  What can that mean?"

Peace reigned during the evening while the old liner plunged and rolled
past wicked Cape Hatteras.  While the passengers listened to the sad
orchestra in the saloon Harry, still in his whiskered disguise, sent a
wireless to a lawyer in New York requesting him to telegraph Pauline at
Nassau something that would make her come home.  Then he went back to
his stateroom and locked the door.

As he stepped in he caught sight of the unbeautiful countenance of Mr.
Boyd squinting wickedly at him from far down the passageway.

"Just for that evil grin of yours, Mr. Pirate," thought Harry, "I am
not going to let you or your friend shoot me until after daylight."  So
Harry kept his porthole closed tight that night, sleeping rather
restlessly without his accustomed ventilation.

Twice he heard a faint scraping sound on the outside of his cabin, and
a dark shadow eclipsed the faint nimbus of light which the foggy night
sent through his porthole.  On the deck directly over his head three
dark figures sat in deck chairs, while a fourth paced the deck, his
cigar glowing like the tail lamp of a distant automobile.

The fog began to lift just before dawn, and the stoker, making another
trip down his rope, found the porthole open.  A hasty inspection of the
decks indicated that it was safe to go ahead.

Owen, Hicks and the "pirate" quickly lowered the stoker, sitting in a
little swing known on the sea as a "bo'sun's chair."  In his hand he
carried a pistol which Hicks had provided.  Each of the three
conspirators had revolvers, but the racetrack man's weapon was chosen
because he had obtained it from a source to which it could not be
traced.  Down went the stoker, his bare feet clinging to the gently
swaying side of the ship.

The porthole was open, and there in the dim interior of the cabin the
light was reflected from a pair of spectacles.  There, too, were the
whiskers and gray hair.  The old man seemed to be asleep in his chair
right near the porthole.  The stoker cocked his revolver and held it
ready for instant action.

The steamer's fog horn blew a blast at the fast thinning fog.  This
noise was just what the stoker wanted.  He quickly plunged his pistol
into the porthole and fired it point blank in the very face of the old
man.  There could be no question of missing.  He looked up at the three
eager faces and nodded that all was well.

"I've got him," he called out, and was about to hurl the pistol into
the stateroom when an unpleasant and unexpected thing happened.  A
brawny fist shot out of the porthole and collided with the stoker's
coal-blackened jaw.

More from surprise than the force of the blow, the stoker fell backward
into the sea.  The three watchers on deck saw the proceeding, and only
one, the "pirate," had presence of mind to hurl a lifebuoy.  No alarm
was sounded.  The steamer went on into the sparkling morning sea,
leaving behind her a profane and disgusted stoker.  This unfortunate
had only a lifebuoy to aid him on a fifteen-mile swim to shore.

"Never mind," said the "pirate" after the conspirators had gotten over
their first fright at the dashing of their plans.  "I have an idea;
it's a corking idea, and you'll all like it."

"What is it?" asked Owen nervously.  "Here is your drink now; what's
your idea?"

But the "pirate" wouldn't tell. He objected that it was too startling
for them to carry in their timid brains.  He would unfold it when the
time came, and he promised them that it would be the greatest and most
daring project they had ever heard.  A murderous glare lit up the faded
eyes and he chuckled to himself, but no offers nor threats would induce
him to part with his secret.






CHAPTER VII

A FLIRTY BUCCANEER

Arrived at Nassua, the party proceeded to the King Edward House, where
Pauline found a telegram from Philip Carpenter, the lawyer, advising
her to return as soon as possible to attend the signing of certain
important papers.  On account of the message all hands made haste to
hunt for a small steamer or launch to complete the trip.

Though none of the four saw him, the old man was at the hotel.  He lost
no time in assuming another and very different disguise, observing to
himself that the most valuable part of his college education might
prove to be the secrets of "make up" he had learned in his college
dramatic club.

Owen, with his usual forethought, had arranged in advance to be put in
touch at once with all available boats.  As a result a gasoline launch,
with a cabin and stateroom, about 100 feet long, which had once been a
yacht, was chartered.  The "pirate's" stipulation that no stranger
should see his island made it necessary for Pauline to deposit a check
for $2,500 for its safe return.

The next morning provisions were brought aboard, the "pirate" declaring
that he could run the engine, and all was ready when a difficulty
arose.  Who was to cook?  Pauline volunteered, but Owen objected, and
finally the "pirate's" objections to a stranger were overcome.

A dark-skinned half-breed, with long, black hair, who had earned half a
dollar by helping carry things on board, volunteered in a gruff voice.

"I'se fine cook.  Best cook on the island.  I cook very cheap."

Time was too valuable to investigate the man's ability, so he was
hired.  Off went the white launch.  Owen steering under instructions
from the "pirate," who soon proved he knew gasoline engines.  Out of
the harbor they went, and then coasted along the beautiful shores of
the island.  The sea was calm and the cruise uneventful for some time,
when the "pirate" called every one's attention to the fact that it was
a long time since breakfast.  He went below and addressed the cook, who
had shut himself up in his tiny galley, as sailors call a boat's
kitchen.

"What's your name?" demanded Boyd.

"Filipo."

"Are you a nigger?"

"I guess so; I dunno."

"Well, what were your father and mother?"

"I dunno."

"That's funny; but what I want to know is how soon grub will be ready?"

"Right away, senor."

"All right, Filipo; see that there is plenty of it."

"Dod foul my hawser, if this ain't what yer might call pleasant,"
declared the "pirate," showing his few teeth in a smile that reminded
Pauline of the spiles of an abandoned pier.

Pauline was pacing the deck apart from the others, in a pleasant
dreaminess scanning the endless azure of the hashed waters.  Her
thoughts roamed forward and backward--forward to the vague magic land
of adventure, where she was to win treasure and delight, fortune and
fame; backward to a big, lovely, splendid house in New York City, where
a certain tall young man, with brown, unruly hair and shoulders broad
as a sheltering wall, must be pining for her.

Some one began whistling in the cabin. Pauline paid no attention to it
at first, but as the tune suddenly shifted to the very latest musical
comedy air she became interested.  Owen never whistled, and Hicks, she
imagined, seldom went to the theatres.

The song shifted from whistle to words:

"I'm a greatly wicked person.  If there's anybody worse on This
terrestrial circumference of guile (Though I very broadly doubt it) I
should like to know about it, For I want to be the blackest thing on
file.

"I'm a bad-mad-man, my dear, I'm a liar and a flyer and flirty
buccaneer.  I've done everything that's awful that a human being can.
I'm a bad--ma-a-d man."

"The song from 'Polly Peek-a-boo.'  Harry and I heard it only two weeks
ago," mused Pauline.

Moved by a sudden whimsy, she entered the cabin.  There was no one
there but the cook.  In his dingy linen suit he was standing at the
table peeling potatoes and whistling.  He stopped as Pauline entered, a
tall powerful man, though of slouching posture, he bowed
deferentially.

"No like me sing--no sing," he suggested.

"On the contrary, I like it very much.  You sing very well indeed,
Filipo.  Would you mind telling me where you heard the song you were
just singing?"

"Big American man, up Nassau--he sing'um.  Very fine man--big fool
daughter," replied Filipo.

"You speak very good English when you sing," remarked Pauline.  "Why
don't you do it all the time?"

The cook hesitated.

"Speak good English all time--bad English when sing!"

Pauline began to scrutinize half suspiciously this remarkable menial,
but he kept stolidly at work at the potatoes, and his dark skin, his
scraggly beard, his bagging trousers upturned over bare feet, his
general dilapidation of appearance, proved him nothing but one of the
common derelicts of the languid islands.

"If you could peel potatoes instead of butchering them, there would be
a little more to eat in case we run out of supplies, Filipo," suggested
Pauline.

He turned on her a frank American grin.  For an instant the twinkle in
the keen blue eyes upset her.

It was so, like the twinkle in a pair of keen blue eyes that were
supposed to be figuratively weeping for her fate in far-off New York.
But instantly he changed his attitude.

"No like cook--cook quit," he grumbled.

"'Oh, no, indeed, Filipo, you must not be offended.  I was just
speaking to Mr. Owen this morning about raising your salary."

A thick voice came to them from the cabin door.

"I begs to report, Miss," said Blinky Boyd, the pirate, reeling in,
"that there be mut'ny in yer crew.  Mr. Hicks and Mr. Owen, Miss, has
rebelled against me authority and has refused me drink."

"That is an outrage, Mr. Boyd.  They do not realize how your
nerve-racking adventures have shattered your strength.  I will attend
to it myself," said Pauline sympathetically.  "Filipo, give Mr. Boyd a
drink."

"Drink?  Yes, meem," replied Filipo, with such unwonted alacrity that
Pauline turned in surprise.

She saw the slouching figure of the cook suddenly stiffen to his full
stalwart height.  She saw an ill clad, but majestic giant stride toward
the pirate, bowl him over with a gentle tap, pinion his arms and legs
in a lifting grasp and carry him toward the door of the cabin.

Cries of rage came stuffily from the thick throat of Boyd.

"Lemme go, ye scum, lemme go," he yelled.

"Filipo!  Filipo!  Stop this instant!  How dare you treat Mr. Boyd in
such a manner?" cried the indignant girl.

"You say, 'Give--him drink.'  He say, 'Lemme go," answered Filipo,
pausing with his squirming burden.

"Drink!  Ye fool, drink!  She is felling ye ter gimme a drink,"
screamed the hero of desperate encounters.

"Big, fat drink," agreed the cook, as he strode toward the rail.

Pauline rushed upon him.  The peril of her precious pirate stirred all
her courage.  She saw her dreams vanishing--the chief narrator,
navigator and guide of the treasure voyage suspended in two strong arms
over the blue deep.  Forgetting that he was accustomed to conquer
twenty men single handed, she felt only pity for his plight.  Her soft
but determined hand gripped the cook's.

"Filipo, obey my orders!" she commanded.

"Yes, Mem.  Let 'um go.  Give 'um drink.  Big liar need big drink."

He lifted the struggling but utterly helpless form of the pirate over
his shoulders, then, with a sudden stooping movement, he made as if to
plunge it into the sea.

"Help! Help!" cried Pauline, running up the deck.

Hicks and Owen rushed from their staterooms. Blinky Boyd was quivering,
gasping beside the rail.  They found a slouching, uncommunicative cook
stolidly washing dishes in the galley.

Some hours later while Boyd was sleeping off his potations and Hicks
and Owen were deep in conference on deck, Pauline slipped down into the
galley ostensibly to explain the rudiments of the culinary art to the
cook.

"The trouble is you have no respect for a potato, Filipo.  You slash
the poor thing to pieces, and then you boil it only long enough to hurt
its feelings."

"Peel potato nice, good," he apologized.  "Then peel 'um pirate.
Filipo want to peel pirate; boil him just half-hurt him feelings.
That's how."

"Oh, I see.  But I think you do Mr. Boyd a great injustice, Filipo.  He
has consented to come all the way from New York with us and take
command of our boat and find the buried treasure, and--"

"Buried potatoes," snapped Filipo with a sudden reversion to his
unimpaired English.

"Well, at least you understand about tomorrow's breakfast now, don't
you?"

"Yes, mem.  Boil 'um eggs to death; no peel 'um."

"No, no, no, Filipo--boil them two minutes and a half.  Here, take my
watch and go by that.  You must be very careful of it, Filipo."

"Yes, mem; boil 'um long time; stick fork in, see when soft."

"No!"

Pauline caught the watch from him.  "You don't boil the watch at all,
Filipo.  You boil the eggs and watch the watch.  Can you tell time,
Filipo?"

"Yes, Mem."

"How long is an hour?  Peel potatoes--hour is ver' ver'  long.  Talk
to ship's lady--whist!--hour is no time," answered Filipo with
upcast hands.

Again she eyed him through her long lashes a little askance.  He was
rather subtle, this half-breed cook, for one who could not even boil an
egg.

"I will let you have the watch, Filipo," she said gravely, "but you
must give it back to me.  It is one of the most precious things I have.
It was given to me by--Filipo, were you ever in love with a girl?"

"Su-u-ure, mem!" replied the cook with sudden enthusiasm.  "Love
daughter big American--no love me.  Big American daughter start from
Nassau--get buried treasure--not!"

"Filipo, where do you get all your New York slang?"

"Big American daughter, she sling slang-good," said Filipo.

"Why did you fall in love with her?"

"Nice girl--no eat much, no scold cook, no talk about potatoes--
just big fool 'bout buried treasure."

"What do you think love is?"

"Love-huh!" grunted the cook.  "I like girl; girl no like me.  Chase
all 'round world--no good."

"That watch was given to me by the man I love, Filipo," said Pauline.
"You won't-boil it--or anything, will you?"

As Filipo took the tiny diamond-scarred timepiece from Pauline's hand
there was a sound as of some one choking at the top of the steps.

The cook sprang to the deck, but there was no one in sight.  He
returned to Pauline, while Blinky Boyd, gasping more from astonishment
than fear, reeled up to Owen and Hicks on the forward deck.

"She's gone clean crazy," he panted.  "She treats that there cook as if
he was a nat'ral human man instid of a sea-rovin' gorilla, worse'n the
one I beat In Afriky."

"No more gorillas for a while, Blinky," commanded Hicks.  "What's
happened now?"

"She's gone an' guv him her jooled watch to boil eggs by," said the
pirate.

"By George, we will have to do something with that fellow," muttered
Hicks to Owen as they walked away.

"Do suthin' to him!" Blinky Boyd was fuming in the wake of Owen and
Hicks on their stroll up deck.  "Do everythin' to him; make 'im walk
the old board; draw'n quarter 'im.  Didn't he attempt me life an' ain't
he at present engaged in stealin' the fambly jewels?"

"Well, have you got any ideas?" asked Owen.

"The first thing," whispered Blinky, "is to git him under the
in-floo-ence of licker.  They never was no cook could stand up agin'
the disgraceful habit o' takin' too much and doin' too little.  Get 'im
under the in-floo-ence."

"And then what?"

"Then--well, ain't they a lot o' good blue water floatin' around atop
the fishes?  Ain't they some accommodatin' sharks swimmin' atop the
water?"

"That's a bit crude--just to throw a man overboard for nothing," said
Owen, willing to arouse Boyd's anger.

"Fer nothin'?  Didn't he insult the master o' this ship.  Ain't he
tried to starve us to death?  Fer wot kind o' nothin', says I."  Boyd
smote his caving chest in emphasis of his accusations.

"And he would have the diamond watch on him in case he should be picked
up," suggested Hicks quietly.

"That's so," said Owen.  "He would have been swimming to shore with the
stolen watch and drowned."

"But, of course, he would swim to shore, unless--well, it's a case of
making sure beforehand.  We could persuade him to go in and try to kill
Blinky here while Blinky's asleep--then rush in and finish him.  Even
Pauline was a witness to the attack he made on Blinky this afternoon."

The pirate's glowing countenance suddenly, went white.

"Not this trip," he said fervently.  "I ain't goin' to kill no man in a
trap like that.  I'm goin' to see it done fair and square in the open
--with plenty o' drink in 'im an' 'is conscience clear.  I wouldn't
see no man die with murder in 'is heart fer me."

"I don't like it," said Owen nervously.  "I don't like the idea of
doing too much.  We've got one big piece of work to do that concerns
her."  He nodded in the direction of the cabin.  "Dye mean to say we
can't get a poor half-breed cook off this boat without killing him?
Why not discharge him?"

Hicks uttered a grim chuckle.  "I must say I never thought of that.
Get a boat manned, will you, Boyd, and we'll put him ashore within half
an hour."

"All hands for'ard," bellowed the pirate's voice.  The "all hands" were
Owen, Hicks, the pirate and Pauline.

"Why all hands?  Can't you handle the cook yourself?" said Owen.

"Not to put that cook ashore--ye need a navy," said Boyd.

Backed by Owen and Hicks, he moved to the cabin.

"You, cook, there--ye're fired.  Get off the boat.  Yer kerriage
waits," he cried down at the busy Filipo.

Filipo shuffled almost meekly toward the speaker.  He saw the skiff
alongside and Hicks and Owen nearby.

"Grab 'im," ordered the pirate.  "Here's the irons."  He produced a
pair of rusty handcuffs that had been brought along, among other
ominous-looking junk, to impress Pauline.

But Filipo was not "fired" yet.  With a sudden long-distance lunge he
knocked down the pirate, who, thought he was at a safe distance.  But
Hicks, who had been well schooled in street-fight tactics, thoughtfully
stuck out a leg and tripped the cook, who fell upon the groaning Boyd.
Boyd, though down, was by no means  "out," and held Filipo tight while
Owen and Hicks slipped on the handcuffs.

"Now to the boat with 'im an' dump 'im ashore wherever It looks hottest
an' hungriest."

"Yah," he snarled in the face of the prostrate cook, "ye don't
interfere no more with the capting of this here vessel. I hopes ye--"

But his sentence was cut short, or rather it ended in a shriek of pain
and fright, as the cook, suddenly swinging himself from his shoulders,
landed a terrifically propelled right foot in the pirate's middle.

He was pinned down again the next moment, but Boyd's yell had
penetrated to the cabin.

"What is the matter--who is hurt?" cried Pauline, rushing to the
group on deck.

"We have had to order this fellow put ashore.  He has twice attacked
Boyd, and besides he is useless as a cook," explained Owen.

"You will assuredly do nothing of the sort," announced Pauline. "You
will take those horrid iron things right off and set him free."

"But, my dear Miss Marvin, he is a desperate man.  It is dangerous."

"What did we come here for but to get into danger?" cried Pauline.
"Besides, Filipo is the most interesting person on the ship.  I have
just devoted a chapter to him in my book, and if you think I'm going to
spoil my book because Mr. Boyd gets hurt, or the potatoes aren't done,
you're much mistaken."

Owen obediently knelt and unlocked the clumsy handcuffs.

"You are free, Filipo," said Pauline with the air of a proud princess
releasing a serf.

"No fired?" grunted Filipo.  "Too bad.  Bum job."

"Now go back to the kitchen, and promise not to strike Mr. Boyd any
more."

"No hit 'um.  Boil 'um. Three minutes; stick fork in hum," said the
cook with a cannibal glare at the still writhing pirate.

He shuffled off to his pots and pans.  Blinky scrambled to his bunk,
and Pauline retired to elaborate the fascinating character of Filipo in
another chapter of her book of adventure.

She did not realize how late it was when at last she put down her pen
and moved with soft, slippered steps to the door of the cabin.

Over the great vault of the heavens the stars were sprinkled like
silver dust.  The boat rolled softly, dreamily on the listless waters.
A cool breeze scented with the fragrance of the spicy land cooled her
brow.  She realized that her little stateroom had been very stuffy.  It
was beautiful here in the hushed night alone.  She moved out on deck.

They had come to anchor for the night off St. Andrew, and the few faint
lights of the town tinged the scene with life.

Pauline was thinking of Harry.  It would have been nice if he were here
now, in the moonlight just for this evening.  Of course if he were a
regular member of the party, he would spoil the trip by his grumpiness,
and probably prevent them from finding any treasure at all.  But Harry
was a good companion--usually, and Pauline was getting a little tired
of the company on the yacht.

The night was so still that even her light footstep could be heard on
the deck.  And she was surprised to hear a muffled hail from some
invisible craft astern.

As she moved to the rail--her tall form in the yachting suit standing
out plainly in the moonlight--she saw a small boat scurry away.  She
thought she recognized their own small boat--the one the yacht towed
--and she quickly made sure that this was true.

Pauline turned toward the cabin to rouse the others for a real pirate
chase, when she was silenced and stunned by the sight of Filipo, the
cook, staggering out of the galley, with his bearded chin drooping on
his breast, his knees swaying under him, his arms weaving cubist
caricatures in the air and his voice raised in unintelligible song.

He was quickly followed by the Pirate, who, to Pauline's amazement,
actually presented a picture of sobriety in contrast to Filipo.

But on seeing her, Boyd looked frightened.

"They have stolen the skiff," cried Pauline.

"No, Miss," said Boyd; "they was four of 'em come aboard in one boat,
an' we let 'em take ourn ashore to bring a double load o' supplies."

Pauline was grievously disappointed.  She turned her wrath upon the
musical and meandering Filipo.

"Filipo!" she demanded.  "Go to bed at once."

For answer he reeled toward her.

"Cook boiled--boiled three minute," he said.

Then with a lurch he fell sprawling at her feet.

Boyd had started back to the cabin in haste and excitement.  Pauline's
first instinct was to leave the inebriated man, but pity mastered her
and she stooped to lift him.

He sprang to his feet without her aid.  His blue eyes looked clearly
into hers.  His body towered again to its commanding height as it had
done when he was about to finish the Pirate.

He stooped and spoke rapidly, sharply in her ear. There was no pigeon
chatter.  It was straight English.

But as the door of the cabin opened again and Boyd came out, the tall
form sank into itself, the knees began to rock, the arms to weave and,
staggering back up the deck, he disappeared in the cabin.

Pauline stood stupefied.  She had been so startled by the sudden
transformation of the man that she had hardly understood his strident
words.

Only one thing she could remember.  He had commanded her to go to bed
and bar her door.  She obeyed but she could not sleep at first.  It
seemed that hours had passed when a sound outside her door brought her
to her feet.

She moved to the door and softly opened it.  Across the threshold lay
Filipo, wide awake.

"Go to bed," he said.  Again she obeyed and this time she slept.

The next morning everything seemed outwardly as usual, the skiff had
been restored to its place astern.  The Pirate was intoxicated; the
cook sober.  But there was the threat of trouble in the air, Pauline
felt it in the attitude of all the men, even of Owen and Hicks.

The Pirate showed a strange new tendency to make friends with Filipo.

"Can you steer, cook?" he asked after the latter had announced that
dinner was ready.

"Yes," said Filipo.

"All right, take the wheel and keep her as she's going till we round
that point ahead there."

Filipo took the wheel and the others descended to find the cabin table
set.  There was a prodigious amount of fried steak and boiled potatoes
as the main part of the meal.  To their dismay they found the steak was
as tough as leather.  A wail of sorrow arose when the potatoes proved
to be so hard that  Pauline doubted if they had been boiled more than
three minutes.

The "Pirate," whose table manners savored of the forecastle, tried a
biscuit and found it as hard as stone and almost as heavy.  In his
anger he hurled it at the side of the cabin and was horrified to see it
go through the boat's side.  He did not know that the biscuit happened
to strike a hole that had been temporarily stopped up with putty and
paint.  He turned speechless to the others and saw Hicks lift a biscuit
on high about to dash it onto the cabin floor.

With instant presence of mind he seized the arm of Hicks, and in a
hoarse voice shouted:

"Don't do that, you'll sink the ship.  Look what mine did."

They all gazed in amazement at the ragged aperture in the side of the
cabin through which the sparkling waters of the Atlantic could be seen
dancing past.

Events moved swiftly that afternoon.  Owen, peering in the galley
porthole beheld the disguised cook remove his wig to wash his face and
recognized the curly light hair of Harry.  About four o'clock the
launch tied up to the landing at the small village of St. Andrew.
There Owen had opportunity to reveal his discovery of Harry's presence
to the other two conspirators. They were frightened at first but soon
agreed that it was a fine chance to get rid of both at the same time.

The pirate confided to them that he had brought a clock-work bomb along
and had it in his bag.  A few minutes' discussion produced a simple
plan.

Owen sent the disguised Harry with a bucket, in search of a spring and
Pauline was already hunting strange flowers among the palms and
creepers.  This left the conspirators free to place the bomb under the
cabin floor boards, a matter which Owen attended to himself.  It was
set to explode two hours later.  Pauline and Filipo were then summoned
and told that there were comfortable lodgings and a good meal
obtainable at a village just the other side of the long narrow point of
land.  If Pauline and Boyd and Filipo would go around in the launch
Owen and Hicks would climb through the jungle and get there in time to
have a meal already upon the boat's arrival.  The two parties separated
and all was quiet for some time.  Pauline sat on deck with the pirate
endeavoring to engage him in conversation.  But he grew surlier and
surlier in his answers, looking frequently at his watch and often
stopping below for a drink.

After about an hour and three-quarter, Pauline became a little
frightened at his behavior and descended to the cabin.  There was the
cook reading a cook book, evidently his own.  The moment Pauline was
out of sight the pirate heaved a sigh of relief and abandoned the
wheel.  Stepping softly to the stern he pulled in the small boat which
was towing astern, leaped in adroitly and cut it adrift.

"Filipo," said Pauline, "you told us you were a good cook."

"Yes, senorita, I thought I was."

"Have you ever cooked before?"

"No, but I have a cook book which tells you how every one may be a
cook.  I thought--"

Filipo, did not finish his sentence.  His eyes were roving around the
cabin in search of something and Pauline was looking very hard at him.

"What's that ticking sound?" inquired the cook.  He went to the cabin
clock and listened.  No, it wasn't that.  Pauline could hear it, too,
and it wasn't her tiny watch.  Filipo made a search of the cabin and
finally located the sound under the floor.  A moment more and he had
laid bare the pirate's bomb.  He leaped on deck and took in at a glance
that the pirate had left in the only boat.

In another instant he was below again, tearing off his wig.

"Polly, it's I.  There's an infernal machine ticking here ready to blow
us up."

He tried to lift up the bomb, but it was wedged fast.

"Harry, for Heaven sake, what do you mean?"

"I'll tell you in a minute in the water as soon as we have jumped
overboard.  Come."

He seized Pauline, carried her up on deck.

"Where's Mr. Boyd?"

"Gone.  Take this," answered Harry, putting a life preserver around
her.

"Now, will you jump or shall I throw you overboard?  One, two, three."

"I'll jump," said Pauline and with arms around each other they leaped
into the warm ocean.  On went the white launch serene and unruffled by
the desertion of its crew.  In answer to Pauline's demand for
explanation Harry only answered:

"Wait."

Finally it came.

A belch of flame shot up from the launch driving a column of smoke far
into the sky, where it spread out and formed a majestic ring, which
floated and curled for many moments.  A concussion reached them through
the water and another in the air smote their ears.

The after part of the launch rode on the waters for a moment and then
disappeared.  Finally a succession of waves tossed them and passed on.

"What does it mean?" gasped the girl.

"Insanity--sheer, downright insanity.  That wretch of  a 'pirate' was
a crazy man.

"He placed that bomb, intending to kill all of us.  And Owen deserves a
sound thrashing for having anything to do with such a murderous
lunatic."

"I think you're rather hard on Owen, Harry," said Pauline.  "Of course,
we all know that pirates aren't nice persons--but nobody could
foresee that the man was crazy."

"Well, perhaps.  But don't talk, we have a mile and a half swim to
shore."

They were spared that ordeal by the Silurian liner Caradoc.  Arrayed in
borrowed clothes they were notified of a second rescue and came out on
deck in time to behold in the dusk of evening the "pirate."  He was
relating to an admiring throng how he had stuck by the burning ship
till it exploded.  He had actually been blown into the air and had
fallen by good luck into the little boat.

"It's a lie," said Harry in the old man's cackling voice.  The "pirate"
heard the voice of the old man and saw the face and the blond hair of
Harry.

It was too much for his evil and murderous mind to bear.  With a shriek
he hurled himself over the rail into the sea.  The Caradoc stopped and
searched, but no trace of the "pirate" could be found.





CHAPTER VIII

THE COURTELYOU RECEPTION

Two weeks later Pauline and Harry were sitting in the library.  Through
the half-closed blinds a soft breeze bore to them the fragrance of
carnations and roses.

For the first few days after their return Pauline was so thankful they
had not lost their lives that she was reconciled to not having found
the treasure.  But only for the first few days.  She was already
growing restless.

"You're wasting time, Harry," she said impatiently.  "I'd rather face
anything than be bored to death."

"Polly, it's got to stop; it isn't safe, it isn't sensible, it isn't
even fun any more.  Won't you drop the whole freakish thing and marry
me?"

Harry was holding Pauline by the hand as she drew her dainty way out of
the library.  In laughing rebellion she looked over her shoulder and
jeered at him.

"Oh, I thought it was I who was going to be afraid," she said.

"Well, if you aren't, who is going to be?"

"You," she tittered.

He drew her back with a gentle but firm grasp.

"Honestly, Polly, aren't you satisfied yet?  Adventure is all right for
breakfast or for luncheon once a month, but as a regular unremitting
diet it gets on my nerves."

"Still thinking of your own perils?" she volleyed.

Harry's fine keen face took on a look of earnest appeal.  He let go her
hand, but as she started to run up the stairs he held her with his
eyes.

"You dear, silly boy," she cried, returning a step and clasping him in
an impetuous embrace.  "You are the nicest brother in all the world--
sometimes--but just now I think that adventure is nicer than brothers
--or husbands.  I'm having the time of my life, Harry boy, and I'm
going on and on, and on with it until I've seen all the wild and wicked
people and places in the world."

Harry caught her hand and smiled down at her in surrender.

A ring at the door bell and the entrance of the maid caused Pauline to
flutter up the stairs.  They were preparing to attend the Courtelyou's
reception that evening to the great Baskinelli, whose musical
achievements had been equaled only by his social successes during this,
his first New York season.

"Anyway," she twinkled from the top of the stairs, "you needn't be
frightened for tonight.  Nothing so meek and mild as a pianist can hurt
you."

Harry tossed up his hands in mimic despair and started back to the
library.

"Yes, I know she is always at home to you, Miss Hamlin," the maid was
saying at the door.

"What a privileged person I am," laughed Lucille Hamlin.

She was Pauline's chum-in-chief, a dark, still tempered girl, in
perfect contrast to the adventurous Polly.  She greeted Harry with the
easy grace of old acquaintanceship.

"Still nursing the precious broken heart?" she queried.

"For the love of Michael, me and humanity," he pleaded, "can't you do
something?  She won't listen to me.  I'm honestly, deucedly worried,
Lucille."

"You know very well that nobody could ever do anything with Polly.  She
always had to have her own way--and that's why you love her, though
you don't know it, Harry.  Shall I run upstairs, Margaret?" she added,
turning to the maid.

"No, you're going to stay here," commanded Harry, seizing her hands.
"You've got to do something with Pauline.  You're the only one who
can.  She wants a new adventure every day, and a more dangerous one
every time.  Talk to her, won't you?  Tell her it isn't right for her
to risk her life when her life is so precious to so many people.  No,
wait a minute; sit down here.  I'm not half through yet."

He drew her, under laughing protest, to a seat beside him on the
stairs.  She realized suddenly how serious he was.  She let her hand
rest comradely in his pleading grasp.

"Why, Harry, yes, if it is really dangerous, you know, I'll do anything
I can," she said gravely.

They did not see the cold gray face of Raymond Owen appear at the top
of the stairs.  The face vanished as quickly as it had appeared.

In her boudoir Polly was laying out her finery of the evening.  There
came a soft rap at the door.

"Come in," she called, and looked up brightly in Owen's furtive eyes as
he opened the door and motioned to her.

"Don't say anything, please, Miss Marvin," he whispered, "just come
with me for a moment."

Bewildered by his manner, she followed to the top of the stairs.  He
directed her gaze to the two young people in earnest conversation
below.

It was a picture that might well have startled a less impetuous heart
than Pauline's.  Harry's hand still clasped Lucille's, and he was
leaning toward her in the eagerness of his appeal.

"You, will?  You promise?  Lucille, you've made me happy," Pauline
heard him say.

Through mist-dimmed eyes, dizzily, she saw the two arise.  She saw the
man she loved clasp Lucille's other hand.  She saw the girl who had
been her friend and confidante since childhood draw herself away from
him with a lingering withdrawal that could mean--ah, what could it
not mean?  Polly fled to her room.

In Owen's subtle secret battle to retain control of the Marvin millions
fate had never so befriended him.  None of all the weapons or ruses
that he had used to prevent the faithful attachment of Harry and
Pauline was as potent as this little seed of jealousy.

Pauline rang for her maid.

"Tell Miss Hamlin that I am not at home," she said in a voice that
started haughtily but ended in a sob.

"But, Miss Marvin--" Margaret tried to demur.

"Tell Miss Hamlin that I am not at home," repeated Pauline.

Lucille had just started up the stairs, leaving Harry with a
sympathetic pat on the shoulder.

"Well, even if I caret do anything with that wild woman," she laughed
back at him, "you know Pauline bears a charmed life.  Nothing has ever
happened to her yet.  Guardian angels surround her--as well as
heroes."

Harry walked into the library.  The agitated Margaret met Lucille on
the stairs.

"Miss Marvin is--Miss Marvin is not at home," the girl said, flushing
crimson.

Lucille paused, dumfounded.

"But, Margaret, you know I thought--I really thought she was, at
home, Miss Hamlin.  I hope you won't be offended with me."

"I insist upon seeing her," cried Lucille.  "I don't believe you are
telling me the truth.  I'm going right up to her room."

Margaret burst into tears.

Lucille quickly reconsidered.  Indignation took the place of
astonishment.  She hurried down the stairs and rushed through the door
without waiting for Margaret to open it.

Pauline, back in her own room, vented her first rage in tears.  With
her hot face pressed against the pillow, she sobbed out the agony of
what she thought her betrayal--her double betrayal, by courtier and
comrade at once.  But the tears passed.  Too vital was the spirit in
her, too red flowing in her veins was the blood of fighting ancestors,
too strong the fortress of self-command within the blossoming gardens
of her youth and beauty for the word surrender ever to come to her
mind.

True, she had found an adventure that stirred her more deeply than the
peril of land or sea or sky could have done.  Here was a thrill that
had never been listed among her intended tremors.  She sent for Owen.

Masked as ever in his suave exterior and his manner of mingled
obsequiousness and fatherliness, he came instantly.

"Mr. Owen, have you known--have you known that this was going on?"

"I feel that it is my duty to know what concerns you--even what
concerns your happiness, Miss Marvin," he answered.

"You mean?"

"I mean that I have long had my suspicions."

But again the very perfection of his deceit brought Pauline that
feeling that she had had since childhood that sense of an insidious
influence always surrounding her, always menacing and yet never
revealed.  This influence, which Owen seemed to embody, was the
antagonist of that other mysterious power, so real and yet so
inexplicable, that warded and protected her--the spirit of the girl
that had stepped from the mummy.

But Pauline had seen with her own eyes; she did not need any word of
Owen's to convince her of the falsity of her lover.

She was quite calm now.  She dressed with the utmost care.  Margaret,
who had seen her in such anger only a short time before, was surprised
at her sprightliness and graciousness.  A slightly heightened color
that only added to the luster of her loveliness, was the single sign of
her inward thoughts.  She summoned her own car and left the house
alone.

The drawing room of the Clarence Courtelyou mansion was ablaze with
light.  There was a little too much light.  The Clarence Courtelyou
always had a little too much of everything.

There was a little too much money; there was a little too much gold
leaf decoration in the drawing room, a little too much diamond
decoration of Mrs.  Courtelyou, and, if you were so fastidiously
impolite as to say so, a little too much of Mrs. Courtelyou herself.

But Mrs. Courtelyou was struggling toward gentility in such an amiable
way that better people liked her.  The motherliness and sweet sincerity
of her--the fact that she loved her frankly illiterate husband and
worshipped, almost from afar, her cultured daughters was the thing that
brought her down from the base height of the "climbers" and lifted her
kindly, harmless personality to the high simplicities of the elite.

She made the natural mistake that other wealthy mendicants at the outer
portals of society have made the mistake of pounding at the gates.
Instead of letting the splendor of her charitable gifts, the
gracefulness of her simplicity, carry her through, she went in for the
gorgeous and the costly.

As a sort of crowning glory she began to "take up" artists and actors
and musicians.  She gained the good graces of the best of them, and in
her kindly innocence she won the worship of the worst.

It was thus that she came to the point of holding a reception for
Baskinelli.

Not that any one had heard anything black, or even shadowy, against
Baskinelli.  He had arrived recently from abroad, his foreign fame
preceding him, his prospective conquests of America fulsomely foretold,
his low brow decorated in advance with laurel.

Mrs. Courtelyou added him to her collection with the swiftness and
directness of the entomologist discovering a new bug.  She herself
loved music--without understanding it very deeply--and Baskinelli,
whatever might be his other gifts, could summon all the cadences of
love from the machines that people call a piano--engine of torture or
instrument of joy.

For half an hour Harry paced at the foot of the stairs.

"I wonder if she's ever coming," he fumed to himself.  "It takes 'em so
long to do it that they drive you crazy, and when it's done they're so
wonderful that they drive you crazy."

"Did you--did you wish anything, sir?" asked the butler, entering.

"No--just waiting for Miss Pauline, Jenkins--just waiting," sighed
Harry.

"Why--if I may presume to tell you, sir--Miss, Marvin has gone to
the reception," said Jenkins.

"Gone!" Harry cried abruptly, hotly, then remembered that he was
speaking to a servant and swung into the reception room.

He put on his hat and coat and rang for Jenkins again.

"How long ago was it that Miss Pauline went out?"

"Almost an hour ago, sir."

Harry slammed his way out of the door.  It was not until he was in the
car on his way to the Courtelyous that he began to think--began to
think with utterly wrong deductions, as lovers always do.

"I must have said too much," he told himself.  "She's crazy about these
wild pranks and she thinks I'm a stupid goody-goody.  What a fool I was
to try to prevent her!"

"You aren't very nice, Mr. Marvin, to snub my pet musician--my very
newest pet musician," Mrs. Courtelyou rebuked him, as he entered.

"I didn't mean it.  I was waiting for--why, my car went to pieces,"
he explained.  "Is Pauline here?"

"Here?  She is the only person present.  Baskinelli hasn't spoken a
word to any one else.  He won't play anything unless she suggests the
subject.  I am glad Mr. Owen is here to protect her."

From the scintillant, filmy mist of women around the piano Lucille
emerged.  She came swiftly to Harry's side.

"What is the matter?" she asked.

"What is?  Tell me." he replied.  "What did you say to her?"

"I didn't see her, Harry.  She sent word that she was not at home."

"You don't mean--not after you started upstairs."

"Yes--and she hasn't spoken to me all evening."

"And she left me waiting at home for half an hour.  It's outrageous."

Harry strode across the floor just as the music ceased, and Baskinelli
arose, bowing to the applause of his feminine admirers.

"May I ask the honor to show to you Madame Courtelyou's portrait of
myself?  It is called 'The Glorification of Imbecility,'" he said as he
proffered his arm to Pauline.

He was a small man, with sharp features shadowed by a mass of flowing,
curling hair--the kind of hair that has come to be called "musical"
by the irreverent.  The sweep of an abnormal brow gave emphasis to the
sudden jut of deep eye sockets, and a dull, sallow skin gave emphasis
to the subtle sinister light, of the eyes themselves.

Pauline accepted the proffered arm of the artist, but daintily,
laughingly, she turned him back to the piano.

"You haven't yet escaped, Signor Baskinelli," she said.  "We have not
yet heard 'Tivoli,' you know."

"Tivoli," he cried, with hands upraised in mock disdain.  "Why, I wrote
the thing myself.  Am I to violate even my own masterpieces?"

There was a twitter of mocking protest from the women.  Baskinelli
began to play again.

"Pauline, may I speak to you--just a moment?" Harry's vexed voice
reached her ear as she stood beside the piano.  She turned slowly and
looked into his bewildered, angry eyes.

"A little later--possibly," she answered, and instantly turned back
to Baskinelli.

From her no mask of music, no glamour of others' admiration could hide
the predatory obsequiousness of Baskinelli.  She was not in the least
interested in Baskinelli.  She had loathed him from the moment when she
had looked down on his little oily curls.  But if Baskinelli had been
Beelzebub he would have enjoyed the favor of Pauline that evening--at
least, after Harry had arrived.

The glowing piquant beauty of Pauline enthralled Baskinelli.  He had
never before seen a woman like her--innocent but astute, daring but
demure, brilliant but opalescent.  When at last they strolled away
together into the conservatory his drawing room obeisances became
direct declarations of love.

Pauline began to be frightened.

She fluttered to the door of the conservatory.  But there she paused.
Voices sounded from the end of a little rose-rimmed alley.  They were
the voices of Harry and Lucille.

Baskinelli was at her side again.

"If I have said anything--done anything to offend," he said, with
affected contrition, "you will let me make my lowliest apologies, won't
you?"

Pauline hardly heard him.  She was intently listening to the low
pitched voices.

"I--I think I will run back to the others," she cried suddenly.
Baskinelli was left alone.

"I congratulate you, Signor, on the success of the evening," said a
voice at his shoulder.  "There are few among the famous who can conquer
drawing rooms as well as auditoriums."

The musician turned to face the ingratiating smile of Raymond Owen.

"I thank you--I thank you, sir.  But I do not believe you.  My
'conquest' has turned to catastrophe.  I have lost everything."

"You mean that you are dissatisfied with the applause?" asked Owen.

"No!  No!  Applause is nothing from the many.  There is always one in
his audience to whom he plays from his soul."

"And that one--tonight?"

"The lovely Miss--what, now, is her name--Marvin.  She bewitches me
--and she scorns me."

"Signor Baskinelli, there are other places than drawing rooms, or even
conservatories, in which to capture those who captivate."

"I--do I quite grasp your meaning, Mistaire Owen?"  He tried to
disguise the suspicion under an accentuated accent.

"I think so, Monsieur Picquot."

At the name Baskinelli turned livid.  He made a movement as if he would
lunge at the throat of Owen, but his fury withered under the glassy
smile.

"So--we met in Paris?"

"Once upon a time--a little incident in the Rue St. Jeanne.  A young
woman was concerned in that incident--and was not heard of
afterward."

"And you are trying to blackmail me for the death of Marie Disart!
Ha!  That is a jest," cried Baskinelli.

"I am trying to do nothing of the kind.  I simply reminded you of the
little affair.  I know as well as you that it was all beautifully
cleared up, and a man is still in prison for it.  I know you are as
safe here as that man is in jail, Signor Baskinelli."

"What are you talking about, then?"

"The little woman that so charmed you here.  I remarked merely that
those who are captivated can capture."

"Not in this country--not among the Puritans.  One must be good--
and unhappy."

"You haven't forgotten your little friends, Mario, and Di Palma and
Vitrio?  They are all respected residents of New York.  We know, where
they might be found."

"At Cagliacci's?"

"Precisely.  Dining upon the best of spaghetti and the richest of
wines, and paying for it at the point of a stiletto."

"But--ha!  You are talking nonsense.  We could not find them; they
could not find us."

"We might telephone and try," suggested Owen.  "Cagliacci, you know, is
now up-to-date.  He has a telephone.  He considers it a sign of
respectability."

"And then what do you propose?"

"Picquot--I mean Signor Baskinelli, I propose nothing.  Unless
possibly there might be--after the reception--a little motor trip
to Chinatown.  It might amuse the ladies."

"You are right.  I will invite them all," said Baskinelli.

"And how about calling up Marie at Cagliacci's just as an old friend?"

"It might be best."

They moved together down the corridor and Owen directed their way to a
little study secluded from all other apartments of the great house.

"You seem to be familiar with the home of our gracious hostess,"
remarked Baskinelli.

"I make it a rule to be familiar with all homes in which Miss Marvin is
entertained."

"Miss Marvin?  You are, then a relative?"

"I am her guardian."

"Ah-h!  You have control--perhaps--of certain small sums bequeathed
to her?"

"Yes."

"And you would like to have as few persons as possible in the Chinatown
party?"

"As few as possible."

In a place known only as Cagliacci's, in the dreg depths of Elizabeth
street, the ringing of the telephone bell was much more startling, much
more unusual than the crash of a pistol shot or the blast of a bomb.

The habitu's moved quietly to the door that leads to the roofs, while
Pietro Cagliacci himself wiped the dust-covered receiver on his apron
and put it to his ear.

He spoke softly, tersely.  The conversation was very brief.  Within a
minute after he had hung up the receiver three grimy-clad, grim-visaged
men left the place silently.

Harry and Lucille came out of the conservatory.

"I tell you there wasn't anything said between us that could have
caused it," he was saying.  "I was fighting the whole thing hard, but I
was fighting it like a beggar.  I am always a beggar with Pauline."

"But you told her it wasn't right that she was risking other people's
lives?"

"No, I told you to tell her that."

In spite of her distress over Pauline's coldness, Lucille burst into
laughter.

They were just emerging into the music room.  Pauline, like the others,
turned at the unexpected sound.  She gave one glance at the two and
turned haughtily away.

Baskinelli was bustling about, making up an impromptu excursion party.

"Ha!  You people of New York--you do not know what is in New York.
All Europe is here--and you never cross Fourteenth street--I mean
to say Fifth avenue."

"It is more dangerous to cross Fifth avenue than to cross the ocean--
that's probably the reason," said Harry.  "The traffic cops along the
Gulf Stream are so careful."

Pauline stopped Baskinelli's intended reply.  She wanted Harry to be
ignored utterly.  Her anger had made him flippant.  His flippancy had
put the seal of completeness upon her anger.





CHAPTER IX

BASKINELLI'S QUARRY

A flutter of polite alarm attended Signor Baskinalli's invitation.

From the sheltered glitter of a Fifth avenue drawing room to Chinatown
was a plunge a little too deep.

But Baskinelli was insistent and Pauline was his ardent and efficient
recruiting officer.  Quite a troop train of limousines carried the
invaders to the uncelestial haunts of the Celestials.

Baskinelli rode in the car with Pauline and Owen.  He had cast off the
dignity of the master musician and assumed an air of whimsical
recklessness.  Harry and Lucille were in the following car.

"Oh, please stop fidgeting," exclaimed Lucille.

"I'm as nervous as you are."

"I know," said Harry, "but I hate to have her alone with that little
black snake for five minutes."

"Owen is with them."

"Owen is worse."

The machines drew up in Chatham Square, and the little procession that
moved across to Doyers street--dainty slippers on blackened
cobblestones, light laughter tinkling under the thunder of the "L,"
human brightness brushing past the human shadows from the midnight dens
--made contrasts picturesque as a pageant in a catacomb.

Pauline, on the arm of the chattering Baskinelli, led the way.

"Isn't this splendid?" she exclaimed.  "I am sure you won't disappoint
me, Signor Baskinelli.  I hope you aren't going to show us a happy
Chinese family at supper.  Only the most dreadful sights amuse me."

"Ali, but we, must not take risks," replied Baskinelli.  "There are
some beings in the world, Miss Marvin, so exquisitely precious that a
man would commit sin if he placed them in peril."

"But only the worst and wickedest places," she admonished Baskinelli.

He leaned suddenly very near to her.

"Do you really mean that, Miss Marvin?" he asked.

"Indeed I do," she answered.

"Very well.  But first we shall go to the new restaurant.  It is yet
too early for the worst and wickedest to be abroad or rather to seek
their lairs."

They climbed a brightly lighted staircase into one of the ordinary
Chinese restaurants of the better sort which are conducted almost
entirely for Americans, and where Boston baked beans are as likely as
not to nudge almond cakes on the bill of fare and champagne flow as
commonly as tea.

They gathered around one of the larger of the cheaply inlaid tables,
and Baskinelli took command of the feast.

Harry sat in grim silence, watching Pauline like a protecting dragon.
Lucille was sick at heart and repentant of coming.  The others chatted
merrily among themselves.  But by common consent Pauline seemed to have
been surrendered to the attentions of the evening pest, who had become
a midnight host.

He leaned toward her with an ardor that he did not even attempt to
disguise.  "You are the most wonderful woman in--"

"Please make it the universe," pleaded Pauline.  "There are so many
most wonderful women in the world."

"No, let us say chaos," he whispered.  "The chaos of a man's heart can
be ruled only by the charming uncertainty of woman."

The intensity of his words brought to Pauline again the twinge of
alarm.  Unconsciously she looked around for Harry.  It was the last
thing in the world she had meant to do.  She was angry at herself in an
instant, for his fixed, guarding gaze was upon her.  She met his eyes
and turned quickly to Baskinelli.

"Chaos?  I've always loved that word," she flashed.  "There must be so
many lovely adventures where there are no laws."

"I said the chaos in a man's heart could be ruled by a woman," said
Baskinelli.

The impudence of this sudden love making moved her unexpectedly to
defiance.

"Please let it be ruled, Signor Baskinelli," she said, turning away
from him.

Baskinelli had sense enough to see that he had gone too far.  He turned
to the others as the soft-footed Orientals began to spread the mixed
and mysterious viands on the table.

He glanced at Owen.  By the slightest movement imaginable, by the least
uplift of his black brows, Owen answered.  For the first time
Baskinelli knew that the lovely quarry he pursued had a protector--
and no mean, no weak protector.

But the arrival of the repast quickly covered the general
embarrassment.  Everybody could see that Pauline and Harry had had a
quarrel and that Pauline, was flirting outrageously with Baskenelli
simply for revenge--that is, every one except Harry could see it.

"Pardon me, but is that what you call a graft investigation that you
are making, Miss Hamlin?" inquired Baskinelli.

"No, but the food is so funny.  There are so many queer things present,
but unidentified," laughed Lucille.

"Like a reception to a foreign artist," interrupted Harry with a
vindictive glare.

"Or shall we say like the conversation of an unhappy guest," said
Baskinelli, smilingly turning to note the entrance of a little party of
newcomers at the further end of the restaurant.

A dashing, well-dressed, fiery-eyed foreigner, the tips of whose waxed
mustachios turned up like black stalagmites from the comers of his
cavernous mouth, was accompanied by two nondescript figures, who seemed
to be embarrassed more by the fact that they had been recently cleansed
and shaved than by their rough red shirts and mismatched coats and
trousers.

The man of the tilted mustachios gave brief, imperative orders to the
waiters, whose languid steps seemed to be quickened by his words as by
an electric battery.  The other two sat silent, like docile dogs in
leash.

Only for an instant Baskinelli's eyes rested upon the group.

"And having tasted the food of the gods, how would you like to visit
the gods themselves?" he asked.

Pauline agreed enthusiastically.  "You mean a joss house--a Chinese
church, don't you."

"Yes."

The joss house that most visitors see in Chinatown is the little one up
under the roof at the meeting of Doyers and Pell streets--at the toe
of the twisted horseshoe made by these tiny thoroughfares of black
fame, where, in spite of all the modern magic of  "reform," men still
die silently in the hush of secluded corridors and women vanish into
the darkness that is worse than death.

The little joss house is interesting in the same way that an Indian
village at a State fair is interesting.  Behind its gaudy staginess and
commercial appeal it still holds something of reality from which the
imagination can draw a picture of an ancient worship that has held a
race of millions in thrall for thousands of years.

But it was not to the little joss house that Signor Baskinelli guided
the party.  In the little joss house the bells are pounded without
respite, the visitors come and go at all hours of the day and night--
save the few set hours when the joss sacrifices profit to true prayer.

Baskinelli took his guests to the joss house of the Golden Screens.

Save for its greater size and more splendid accoutrement, it was little
different from the other.  But it was walled, in its back alley
seclusion, deep behind the outer fronts of Mott street, by a secrecy
almost sincerely sacred.

The motor cars remained far behind across the square as Baskinelli led
the party through the dismal streets and stopped before a dark
doorway.

A dim light flared behind the door and a Chinaman in American dress
admitted them.

"I am beginning to be really bored," said Pauline.

"Wait; give the wicked a chance," said Baskinelli.

They climbed three flights of dingy, narrow stairs, lighted with
flaring gas jets.

"Wonderful," jeered Pauline.  "Not even a secret passage or a
subterranean den!"

The others followed her laughing lead up the stairs.

A Chinaman came out of the door on the second landing, stopped, started
in innocent curiosity at the dazzling visitors and went down the
stairs.  Everything was as still and commonplace as if they had been in
the hallway of a Harlem flat building.

The silence was not broken or the seeming safety disturbed in the
slightest by the soft opening of the first landing door, after they had
passed--that is, after all but Owen had passed.  No one but Owen saw
the piercing black eyes and the tilted mustachios of the face that
appeared for an instant at the door.

There was a corridor, not so well lighted, at the top of the third
flight of stairs.  In the dim turns the women drew their skirts about
them, a bit wary of the black, short walls.

The passage narrowed.  They could move now only in single file, and
even then their shoulders brushed the walls.

Only a far, dull glow from a red lamp over a door at the end of a
passage lighted their way.

Baskinelli tapped lightly on the door.

It was opened by a venerable Chinaman in the flowing robes of a
priest.  He looked at them doubtfully.  Baskinelli spoke three words
that his companions did not hear.  The priest vanished.  Quickly the
door was reopened and they stepped into the dim, smoky, stifling
presence of the joss.

The choking scent of the punk always at the folded feet of the idol was
almost suffocating.  The place had other odors less noxious and less
sweet.  Chinamen were lounging in the room as if it had been a place of
rest.  Three priests were on their knees before the joss swaying
forward till their foreheads almost touched the floor, their
outstretched arms moving in mystic symmetry with their rocking bodies.

A great brass bell hung low beside the idol.  But no priest touched the
bell.

The joss itself was almost the least impressive thing in the room.  It
stood, or squatted, six feet high, on a block pedestal at the side of
the room.  The simple hideousness of the painted features served no
impressive purpose, but as contrast to the exquisite decorations of the
room.

Screens of carved wood, so delicately wrought that it seemed a touch
would break the graven fibers, were flecked with inlay of pearl and
covering of gold.

One of the peculiar features of the room was a suit of ancient Chinese
armor--a relic that had been rusted and pit-marked by time, but now
stood brightly polished beside the statue of the god.  A huge two-edged
sword was held upright in the steel glove.

By the dim light behind the idol the shadow of the sword was cast
across the blank face of Baskinelli as he moved forward.  He stepped
back quickly.  The shadow fell between him and Pauline.

Again the ancient priest answered a summons at the door.  Again he
parleyed for a moment--then opened it to the three swarthy foreigners
who had been in the restaurant.

Baskinelli turned for just in instant to glance at the tall man with
the tilted mustache, then resumed immediately his conversation with
Pauline.

"Why do all the Chinamen run away like that?" she asked.

"It is the end of the service; you see the priests are going, too."

There was a furtive haste about the departure of the Orientals.  And
there was a quavering in the manner of the oldest priest--the only
one who remained--that seemed born of a hidden fear.

The old priest lifted one of the lamps from a wall bracket and set it
on the floor beside the idol.  He knelt near it and began to pray.

The three Italians waited only a moment, then followed the Chinese out
of the room.

"It is late--we ought to be going," pleaded Lucille.

Complete silence had fallen on the room and her words, a little
tremulous, had instant effect on the other women.

"What about it, Baskinelli?  Had we better be going?" asked one of the
men.

"Yes--yes, I beg only a moment.  I wish to show Miss Pauline the--"

"You mean Miss Marvin, do you not?" blazed Harry, striding to
Baskinelli's side and glaring down at him.

"I was interrupted.  I had not finished my words. They are, at best,
awkward, I beg--"

"You beg nothing," said Harry through clenched teeth.  Then slowly,
grimly:

"I want to tell you, you little leper, that if anything happens here
tonight--it is going to happen to you."

He was so near to the musician that the others did not hear.

Baskinelli backed away.  Pauline, with the swift, inexplicable, yet
unerring instinct of woman, moved as if to seek the shelter of Harry's
towering frame.

He did not see her.  He had whirled at the sound of the opening of a
door--a peculiar door set diagonally across a corner of the room
behind the joss.

Through the yellow silk curtains that hid the entrance came two
Chinamen as fantastically hideous as the embroidered dragons on the
tapestry.

"Put those men out; they cannot come in here; they are full of opium,"
commanded Baskinelli.

"Stop; let them come in; we are going," said the mild voice of Owen.

The understanding look of Baskinelli met his.  Baskinelli frowned and
Owen smiled.  They were playing perfectly their roles.

The two Chinamen shuffled into the room.  The priest arose in jabbering
protest.  They argued with him acridly.  A few feet away one could see
that their cheap linen robes covered the ordinary street garb of the
Chinamen; that the ugly lines on their faces were painted, as on the
face of the Joss.

Baskinelli was laughing.  The others watched the argument in silence.
Every one but the host, and Owen, and Pauline, seemed a little
nervous.

Suddenly the lamp on the floor went out.  There was another at the
farther side of the room, but its dim light made the scene more weird
than darkness could have made it.

"Well, I thought we were going," snapped Harry's strident voice.

"We are," replied Baskinelli. "Miss--er--I am afraid to speak--
Miss Marvin, shall we go?"

Pauline took his arm.

"Ali, but I have forgotten the most precious sight of the evening,"
suddenly exclaimed the musician.  "Only a moment--look here."

Interested, Pauline did not notice that Owen softly shut the door upon
the receding footsteps of the others.  Baskinelli guided her back to
the little door behind the screen--the door from which the Chinamen
had entered.

Baskinelli drew aside the curtain.

"There--that is one form of adventure."

Pauline looked through the curtain.  A suffocating, narcotic odor came
to her.  What she saw was stifling not only to the senses--but to the
soul.  She turned away.

"Polly!"

Harry's voice rang through the little choked room like a thunder
blast.

"We are coming--we are quite safe," called Baskinelli, with the sneer
tinge in his tone.

"Very well, then; hurry."

Harry's manner aroused Pauline's temper again.  She purposely
lingered.

The two Chinamen were arguing violently now with the priest.

Harry had closed the door and followed the others down the outer
passage.

"Miss Marvin--Pauline!" called Baskinelli with sudden passion.  "Have
you a heart of stone?  Can you not see me helpless in your presence?
Do you know what love is?"

He stepped towards her and tried to take her in his arms.  But she was
stronger and far braver than he.  She thrust him aside and fled through
the door.

Baskinelli followed, protesting, pleading.

Strangely, as she fled through the narrow corridor, the low, flaring
gas jets were extinguished one by one.

She groped in darkness.

Baskinelli's pleading voice became almost a consolation, a protection.

Her elbow struck something in the passageway.  The something shrank at
the touch.  She heard a quick drawn breath that was not Baskinelli's.
She tried to run.  The tiny passageway chocked her flight.  She plunged
helplessly between invisible, but gripping walls.  She reeled and
screamed.

There was the sound of a struggle behind her.  She heard Baskinelli
crying for help--but, oh, so quietly!  She reached the stairs.  The
stairs were blocked by a closed door.  The door was barred.  But there
was a light left burning by the door.

Her weak hands beat upon the panels, helplessly, hopelessly.  How
should she know that there were two doors, locked and sealed beyond?

Her wild screams rang through the long passage, through the dark, above
the shuffle and beat and cursing of the staged fight.

In the dim light she could see the three Italians grappling with the
other men.  Baskinelli's voice called to her reassuringly. It might
well.  Baskinelli was in no danger.

She placed her softly clothed shoulder to the door and strove to break
it.  She screamed again.

"Harry!  Harry!"

Dull crashes answered.  There was the crack and cleaving of splintered
wood.

"Hold on!  I'm here!" she heard.

She fell beside the door.  Strong arms seized her.  For an instant she
felt that she was saved.  But she looked up into the lowering face of a
man with tilted mustachios.  From the wide thick lips came threats and
curses.

From the outer passageway sounded the crashing of the doors.

She let herself be lifted, then, with sudden exertion of her trained
strength, she broke the grasp of the man.

The door fell open.

Harry, bloody and tattered, stood there--alone.

"Polly?"

"Oh--yes--where are the others?  They'll kill you--run!" she
cried.

He ran forward into the black corridor.  A knife thrust, sheathed in
silence, ripped his shoulder gave him his cue.  He had one man down and
trampled.  But another was upon him and yet a third.

A sharp pain dulled the pulsing of his throat.  He felt a tickle down
his bared and swinging arm.

He fought blindly in the dark.

"Polly!" he panted.

There was no answer.

    *     *     *     *     *

In the Joss House of the Golden Screens the two Chinamen, dazed with
opium, set of purpose, were still arguing with the trembling priest.

The door fell open and a white woman--with bleeding hands--fell at
their feet.

"Ha, she has come back!" cried one of the Chinese in his own tongue.

There was the sound of steps in the outer passage.

"Quick--inside!" breathed the Chinaman, pointing to the den.

They lifted Pauline.  The old priest stopped them.

"Not there--not there!" he cried.  "Any one would look in there."

They dragged her back.  The priest hurried to the outer door and locked
it.

There was the blunt, battering thrust of a body against the door.

"Open, or I'll break it in!" yelled the voice of Harry.

The priest opened the door.

In deferential silence he saluted the battle grimed newcomer.
Battered, panting, bleeding, Harry lunged at the man, gripped him.

"Quick--where is she?  You'll die like a spiked rat.  Where?" he
roared.

The two other Chinamen were kneeling before the Joss.

There was a moment's silence, then a strange sound--like a cry heard
afar off.

Harry strode to the little pedestal where the suit of armor stood.

"Where is she?--or I'll rip this place to cockles!" he thundered.

"We do not know what you mean," said the priest.

The two Chinamen began to jabber.

Other figures reeled from the room behind the curtains.  But over all
their clamor sounded again the faint cry--distant, but near.

In a flash Harry caught from the mailed glove the haft of the sword.
As he rushed across the room the Chinese withered away from him.  There
was a crash as the great sword fell upon one of the windows.  Through
the broken pane Harry shouted for help.  His voice was like a clarion
in the silent streets.

He turned in time.  Three Chinamen, with drawn knives, were upon him.
He swung the unwieldy sword above his head.  Its sweep saved him.  He
dashed at the Joss.  Again he lifted the sword.  A grasp and then a
wail of fear sounded through the room.

He struck.  The head of the statue thudded to the floor.

The Chinese rushed upon him.  They were desperate now in the face of
the violation of their god.  But he was behind their god prying open
the secret door to the hollow within the statue.

"It's all right, Polly," he said as he drew her gently forth.

He stood above her with his back to the wall swinging the sacred sword
against the onslaught of fanatic men.  They fell before him, but more
came on.

His hands could hardly hold the mighty weapon.  For more than half an
hour he had been fighting.  He was weakening but he braced himself and
swung for the last time.

There came a hammering at the door.  It crashed in.  Police clubs
whistled right and left.  The Chinese fled into their secret lairs.

    *     *     *     *     *

"And I guess that will be all," panted Harry in the taxi that took them
home.  "I don't think you'll ask for any more adventures after this
one."

"Why didn't you pick up the Joss's head?" replied Pauline.  "It would
have looked so nice and dreadful in the library?"

But the glory of her golden hair nestled upon his torn shoulder and he
knew that he would go through all the perils in the world for happiness
like this.





CHAPTER X

KABOFF'S WILD HORSE

For several months after old Mr. Marvin's death, Owen had kept to his
cubby-hole room adjoining the financier's small, plain-furnished,
workaday office.  But recently he had got the habit of doing his work
in the library, where the tall, pure statues looked down upon his
skulking head and the grand old books that had borne their messages of
good from generation to generation, held their high thoughts in stately
contrast to his skilled and cruel plots.

Above the bowed bald head that was planning the death of a young girl
to gain her fortune stood a figure of Persephone-child of innocence and
sunlight shadowed by black robes of Dis.  Upon the coward who feared
all but the darkest and most devious passages of crime shone high,
clear brows of Caesar and Aurelius.  Gray folios of Shakespeare held up
to the ambitious ingrate the warning titles of "Lear" and "Hamlet" and
"Macbeth."  And by his side brooded ever that mystic relic of the
farther past--the Mummy, from whose case had stepped a daughter of
the Pharaohs in the likeness of Pauline.

But Owen thought little of contrasts.

He was opening his mail on a morning in early May when he came across
an envelope addressed in the awkward scrawl of Hicks.  He tore it apart
nervously, for if Hicks could be moved to write, it must be a matter of
concern.

"Dear Owen, No doubt he suspects you of foul play. He has seen his
attorneys and is about to take steps to have you removed from the
trustee-ship."

The paper crackled in Owen's trembling hand.  So the Baskinelli
incident had gone a little too far.  Harry Marvin had sense enough to
know that he would not have to fight three murderous Italians and a
rabble of Chinese unless there had been a plot behind Pauline's peril.
It might be best to go directly after Harry--to put him out of the
way first.  And yet, Owen pondered, there was no proof of anything
wrong.  Pauline was admittedly plunging into these adventures of her
own free will.  Nothing could be proved against him or Hicks.

He resumed his work.  Among the letters lay an advertising dodger which
had been dropped through the door.  Owen glanced at it carelessly at
first, then with keen interest.  He read it over:

"BALLOON ASCENSION FROM PALISADES

"Signor Panatella, the famous Italian Aeronaut, will make parachute drop
from height never before attempted."

The ascension was to be made that afternoon from one of the amusement
parks on the New Jersey shore of the Hudson.

"This is Providence," he muttered to himself, catching up the dodger.
Slipping through the door and up the stairs, he tapped at the door of
Pauline's room.  When there came no answer he entered swiftly, laid a
paper on the table and glided back to the hall, back to the library.

From there he called up Hicks.

Hicks' domiciles were so many and suddenly changeable that he claimed
nothing so dignified as a regular telephone number.  But he had
scribbled on the bottom of his note the number of a saloon on the lower
West Side.

He was there when Owen rang.

"Hello, Hello, . . . Is that you, Hicks? . . . I want to see you. . . .
What? . . .  No, right away. . . .  Broke? . . . you always are ....
you'll get the cash all right. . . .  What's that? .... Come here? ....
Not on your life.  I'll come to you .... Not half that time ....
I'll take the motorcycle.  All right .... Good-by."

He hung up the receiver, went up to his room and got into cycling kit.
As he came down stairs he met Pauline, who was returning from a
shopping trip.

"Good morning, Owen," she said brightly.  "Do you know, I believe there
is more peril in a dry goods store than on a pirate yacht.  What parts
of my new hat are left?"

"Only the becoming ones."

She sped on up the stairs.  After her first imperative inquiries of the
mirror concerning what she considered her wild appearance, she picked
up the letters on her dressing table and began to run through them.

The large black type of an advertising dodger loomed among the
letters.

Pauline tripped down the stairs.  To Harry, seated on the steps
enjoying the Spring sunshine and puffing a leisurely cigarette,
appeared a mysterious vision.

He knew by the elaborate way in which she took her seat beside him and
hid the piece of paper in her hand that she had some new whim in
fermentation--something to ask him that she knew he wouldn't want to
do.

"Yes," he said, moving along the step away from her.  "I know you've
just bought me the loveliest cravat, that I'm the nicest brother in the
world, that I look so handsome in Springy things and--well, what it
is?"

Pauline pouted at the other end of the step.

"I'm going up in a balloon and jump down," she announced, "from a
height never before attempted."

"Polly I You are going to do nothing of the--"

"No, I wasn't going to, until you grew so great and grand.  I just
wanted to go over and see him fly."

She tossed the dodger over to him.  He glanced at it.

"Well, if you promise you aren't plotting any more pranks, I'll take
you."

"That's a worth-while brother.  It's a pink one."

"Pink one?"

"Cravat, of course."

Harry groaned.  "Give it to the cook," he pleaded.  "He wears 'em
alive.  If that fellow goes up at 2:30, you'd better hurry."

"I'll be ready before you are."

She rose quickly, but Owen, looking, listening, had time to close the
door unseen, unheard.

At the rear of a little West Side saloon, he signaled with his horn,
and Hicks came out.  He was a bit shabbier than usual, and he had been
drinking, but he was not intoxicated.

Owen locked his machine and taking his arm walked him rapidly up the
avenue.

"What do you mean by writing to me?" demanded Owen.  "Haven't I told
you never to put words on paper?"

"Oh, I guess you got that house wired so nobody'll catch you," grunted
Hicks.  "Live wires, too-clever butlers, footmen, maids, chauffeurs,
cooks; you're safe enough."

"You forget those are your wires.  They don't know they're working for
me.  Hicks, are you out of your head?  Have you told Bemis that you and
I are working together?"

"Sure not; but that butler is no fool, Mr. Owen."

"Was it from him you found out that Harry had the lawyers after us?"

"No--queer thing that, that--it wasn't."

"Who, then?"

"The little Espinosa."

"Espinosa--in New York?"

"Yes--met her at the Trocadero a week ago.  She'd seen old Calderwood
already.  I guess she blackmails him--the old reprobate, and him the
noble counselor at law for Mr. Harry Marvin!"

"So you put her on the scent--for us?"

"Why not?  The young fellow's been acting suspicious for a long time."

"You did very well."

"How about some money--I haven't seen the color of a roll since you
put that fool Baskinelli into the game.  Ain't you coming across?"

"Certainly; here," said Owen, handing over enough to sate even the
predatory greed of Hicks.  "Now, what I want you to do is to find me
some one among your horse racing friends who is down and out enough to
take a little cash job--at certain slight risks?"

"Yes--what?"

"I want a good rider on a wild horse.  He could make a thousand dollars
in an afternoon if the horse should happen to get wild at the right
time and do the right thing."

"Hm'm," mused Hicks.  "I wonder if Eddie Kaboff has still got his
livery stable down on Tenth avenue.  We might go see."

After ten minutes' walk Hicks brought up in front of a bill-plastered
door in a fence.  He held it open for Owen and they passed across a
vacant lot to a large dilapidated-looking stable at the further end.

The short, dark man who sat in a tilted chair against the doorway and
puffed lazily at a pipe, seemed to embody the spirit of the building
and the business done there.

He was a man who had once--in the days of racing--been called a
"sport."  He might still be called "horsey" and would consider the term
a compliment.  But Eddie Kaboff's fame and fortune had both dwindled
since the good old betting days when little swindling games larded the
solid profits of crooked races.  One by one his thoroughbreds had given
up their stalls to truck horses, just as Eddie's diamond studs had
given place to plain buttons.

His beady black eyes watched the two newcomers on their way across the
lot, but he gave no sign of recognition until Hicks and Owen reached
the door.

"Hello, Eddie," said Hicks.

Kaboff got up slowly and extended a flabby hand to his acquaintance.
He was introduced to Owen, who let Hicks do the talking.

"What's new, Eddie?"

"Nuthin'."

"Still got that wild horse you never was able to sell?"

"Yep."

"Can you still manage him yourself?"

"I guess I could, but he ain't safe to take among traffic."

Hicks stepped close to Kaboff, talking in rapid whispers.  The little
man turned white.

"No, no; I'm too old for that kind of game," he said.

Owen drew from his pocket a roll of yellowbacks--the biggest roll
Eddie Kaboff had seen since the days of  "easy money."

"This much to try it," said Owen, "and as much again if you make good."

Kaboff's glance wavered a moment between the penetrating eyes of Owen
and the money in his hand.

"Take it; it's yours."

The flabby hand closed almost caressingly around the roll.  "We'll go
in and have a look at the brute," he said.

They followed him through a line of stalls to a large padded box at the
far end of the barn.  A beautiful bay saddle horse occupied the box.
Kaboff entered and called the animal, which answered by flying into a
seeming fury, plunging about the box, kicking, rearing and snapping.

"Same old devil," muttered Hicks.  "He'll do."

The sight of an apple in Kaboff's hand calmed the animal.  It came to
him and ate docilely while he slipped a bridle over its head.  Once
outside the stall, however, it began another rampage.

Hicks held a last whispered conversation with Kaboff, giving him minute
instructions.

"I can just try it, you know," said Kaboff.  "I can't guarantee to get
away with it."

"As much again if you do, you know," said Owen as he started briskly
away with Hicks.

The place that Panatella had chosen for the start of his balloon
ascension was a field upon the crest of the Palisades above the
amusement park.

Panatella had brought with him from abroad a reputation for dare-devil
adventures in the air.  And he had proved his reckless courage in the
several brief ascensions that he had already made on this side.

Today, with his promise of the longest parachute drop on record, people
flocked to the field from New York and all adjacent New Jersey.

"I wish you wouldn't always invite that velvet-pawed servant on our
trips," grumbled Harry to Pauline, as Owen went for his dustcoat.

"Owen is my trustee and guardian.  You have no right to speak of him as
a servant.  Besides, when he's along he keeps you from being silly."

Harry stamped out to the garage, swung a new touring car around to the
door, and soon, with Owen and Pauline, was speeding for the ferry.

Signor Panatella was superintending the filling of the great gas bag.
He was a tall, lithe man in pink tights beneath which his muscles
bulged angularly like the gas filling the balloon bag.

A Latin rapidity of speech and motion added to the pink tights made him
comically frog-like, and even the abattis of medals on his breast could
not save his dignity.

He bustled about giving orders to the workmen who were preparing to cut
the ropes, then flitting back to the crowd to answer the questions of
impromptu admirers.

Pauline had left the car and was standing between Owen and Harry near
the rapidly filling bag.

"I wish I could talk to him, too--he's so cute and hippety-hoppy,"
she said.

Owen stepped to Panatella's side.

"Would you permit the young lady to see the balloon basket?" he asked.

"With pleasure," said the airman after a glance at Pauline.  He led the
way to the basket, and helped Pauline up so that she could look at the
equipment, the anchor with its long coil of rope, the sand bags and
water bottles.

She was plainly fascinated as Panatella explained the manner of his
flight and his drop through the air.  As she saw them attach the basket
to the tugging bag she was thrilled.

At this moment there was a flurry of excitement on the outskirts of the
crowd.  A horseman on a beautiful bay mount, that was evidently
unmanageable, came plunging and swerving down the field.

The crowd broke and scattered in front of the menacing hoofs that flew
in the air as the vicious animal reared.

The horseman, clad in a somewhat threadbare riding suit, was a small
man with beady black eyes that turned from side to side as he swayed in
his saddle.  He seemed to be afraid of his mount and to be looking for
help.  But it was remarkable that apparently so poor a rider held his
seat and actually managed to bring the beast to a nervous stand some
fifty yards from the balloon.

The little man looked around over the heads of the crowd.  He caught
sight of Owen beside Pauline near the balloon basket.  The lifting of
his riding cap might or might not have been a salute and signal.

"Oh, I wish I hadn't promised Harry not to go up.  I know Signor
Panatella would take me," sighed Pauline.

Harry had turned away to watch the actions of the strange horseman.

"You might scare him a little," Owen suggested.

Those words were the greatest risk he had taken in all his deeply laid
plots.

Pauline caught at the suggestion eagerly.  She sprang lightly from the
little platform into the balloon car.

A murmur of mingled astonishment, applause and alarm rose from the
crowd.  Two of the workmen were cutting the last ropes that held the
basket to earth. Ten others were holding it with their hands awaiting
the airman.

Panatella purposely delayed the moment of mounting the basket.  The
tugging of the huge balloon against the strength of a dozen men gave
impress to his feat, and he liked the state of suspense.

But the sound from the surprised throng called his attention now to a
scene that made him forget affectation and effect.  He started to run
toward the basket, shouting peremptory orders:

"Out of the car; out of the car instantly, madame!  You are risking
your life."

His excitement infected the crowd.  Surging, it seemed to sweep with it
the rider on the restive horse.  For, as a hand was suddenly lifted in
the midst of the crowd the horse apparently overcame the legs braced to
spring, it shot forward directly at the balloon basket.

The hand that had been raised was the hand of Raymond Owen.

All was happening so swiftly that neither Harry nor Panatella reached
the basket before the maddened animal.

The crowd had given way in panic before it.  Cries of fright were
mingled with cries of pain as the beast charged straight upon the men
holding the basket, felling and crushing them with shoulder and hoof.

For an instant a few desperate hands held to the wrenching car.
Panatella had all but reached the platform; Harry was within arm's
length of it, when, with a writhing twist the bag jerked the basket
sideways and upward, knocking to the ground the last two men who had
held it and whirling forth into the deathly emptiness of space a
cowering, stunned girl, whose white face peered and white hands pleaded
over the basket rim--peered down upon the upturned faces of thousands
who would have risked their lives to aid, but who stood helpless in
their pity, hushed in fear.

For a moment Harry had stood dazed.  It was as if the twanging taut of
the ropes, as the bag tore almost from his grasp the most precious
being in the world, had snapped the fibers of action in him.

The daze passed quickly, but in the moment of its passing.  The
balloon, risen now five hundred feet in the air, had swept its way
westward over a mile of ground.

Harry turned to look for his motor car.  Standing as he was at the spot
from which the balloon had ascended, he now faced a human barricade.
With a shout of warning he charged at what seemed to be a vulnerable
point in the files of wedged shoulders.  The wall resisted.  The throng
was lost to all but the dimming view of the balloon.  Harry swung right
and left with his broad shoulders.  He tore his way through.

The car was standing where he had left it on the outskirts of the
field.  As he approached it he saw Owen emerge from the crowd and hurry
toward a runabout that had just been driven upon the field.

"What's the matter?" yelled a man in the machine, and Harry recognized
the voice of Hicks.

"Miss Marvin--carried away in the balloon!" cried Owen in a tone of
excitement that was not all feigned.  He joined Hicks beside the
runabout.

Harry sprang to the seat of his touring car.  It seemed to leap
forward.  He shot past the two conspirators and heard Owen's voice
calling after him:

"Wait!  Where are you going?  I'll go with you."

"You're too late," shouted Harry bitterly, over his shoulder.  An
envelope of dust sealed itself around the spinning wheels of the big
machine as he took the road after the balloon.

Steadfast but hopeless he fixed his eyes upon the unconquerable thing
in its unassailable element--a thing that seemed to be fleeing from
him as if inspired by a human will.  Death rode beside him at his
breakneck speed, but he did not know it.  He knew only that he must
follow that black beacon in the sky--that he must be there when its
flight was over--when the end came.

He did not know that Owen and Hicks, in the runabout, were also
following--that they, too, watched with an interest as deep as his,
with a hope as poignant as his hopelessness, the dizzy voyage of
Pauline.






CHAPTER XI

FROM CLOUD TO CLIFF

"Wonder what he thinks he can do," growled Hicks as they sat in the
runabout and watched Harry pass them.

"Trying to break his own neck--for nothing," replied Owen.  "If he
keeps up that speed we'll get both birds with one sand bag."

"I hope so.  He didn't speak, did he?  You can see by the way he acts
he don't want us around--even now."

"It doesn't matter what he wants--it's what he does."

"You don't think he can save her?"

"He might--and I don't want her saved this time, Hicks, you
understand.  I can't afford it this time.  I've said too much."

"Well?"

"Where did you get this runabout?"

"Upper East Side--private party; I didn't want to do any business
near home."

"That's right."

"How much is this machine worth?" asked Owen irrelevantly.

"Oh, six or seven hundred--it ain't new.  Why?"

"If anything should happen to it, there wouldn't be any trouble,
provided the bill was paid, would there?"

"I got an idea the owner would grab at $300 for this here buggy.
But why?"

"And if this automobile disappeared, vanished--no trace of it; you're
sure there wouldn't be any investigation?" pursued Hicks.

"Yes--it would be all right, I tell you.  But I want to know what
your scheme is.  How can you use this machine to get rid of Harry?
Tell me," Owen insisted.

"Never mind--yet.  How do you make the course of the balloon now?"

"I guess she'll go over Quirksborough and then up between Hoxey and
Brent."

"Then we can pass him at Quirksborough."

"How do you figure that?"

"He'll stop for gasoline.  He hasn't got enough to go more than two
miles beyond there.  I saw that he hadn't when we set out."

"What do you want to pass him for?  Why not let 'em both break their
own merry little necks an' us pick 'em up an' do the weepin'
afterward?  That's our music."

"You fool!  Don't you think a balloon ever came down safe yet?  Don't
you know that young devil has got his head full of schemes to beat me
out' again?  I tell you we've got to make sure of this trick.  We've
got to get him."

Unconsciously Hicks brought the machine to a stop as both men strained
their eyes at the balloon, now traversing a lower course more slowly.

They saw Pauline stand erect in the basket and lift the heavy anchor
over the side.

Harry, going at terrific speed on the deserted road, saw the drop of
the anchor with a thrill of hope.  At least--even if it was useless in
itself--it showed him that Pauline was brave and calm enough to use
her wits.  He waved again but there was no answering signal.

Suddenly the balloon itself was lost to sight from the road.  At the
lowering angle, drawn downward partly by the anchor and partly by the
gradual loss of gas, it swung over the hills.

The road led between two hills.  Beyond it curved to the east and
north.  As he reached the curve Harry was surprised that the balloon
was not in sight.  When after circling another hill Harry had still
failed to pick it up he was alarmed as well as puzzled.  The hills had
muddled his senses of direction, but he knew that he was near the river
again--back on the verge of the Palisades.  This added to his fears.

There was but one thing to do, though--follow the road.  He went on
slowly.

Suddenly he uttered a cry and threw on full speed.  Over the top of a
high, jagged cliff, set like a rampart between two bastion knolls, he
saw the upper half of the gas bag.

It veered and tossed in the wind like a tethered thing.  The basket was
invisible, but Harry knew that the anchor had caught on the cliff
side.

As he neared it he discovered that what was a cliff on one side was the
river wall on the other.  He thanked heaven that the road led to the
top of it.  He turned the machine up the road, which threaded narrow
ledges through growths of bramble and stunted trees.

He saw and turned sick in soul and body, for the pulling of the balloon
held the basket almost inverted, and Pauline was not in the basket.

The anchor had doubled itself into rock or root far down the cliff
side.  From it the balloon dragged toward the river instead of toward
the shore.  The taut rope writhed fifty feet out from the top of the
declivity.

To the edge of the cliff crawled Harry.  He moved rapidly, but at the
uttermost verge he paused and covered his eyes with his, hand.

At last he looked down.

To Pauline on her wild flight had come increasing calm.  As she felt
the balloon reaching lower levels--though it still soared high above
the hills--she even allowed herself a little hope.  Leaning over, she
watched the shining blades of the anchor dance through the air.
Northeastward she could see the waves of the great river dancing.  On
the little anchor, hung her hope of life; in the water beyond the
farthest cliff lay her final peril.

She had lost track of Harry and the other automobile long ago.  She had
given up all hope of aid from any living thing.

The balloon moved slowly above the palisade.  The anchor dragged on the
landward side of the knolls.  These were sheer rock that the steel
talons clawed in vain.

The balloon moved out over the river, then suddenly glided back.  An
eddy of breeze from the water had turned its course.  The anchor
dangled along the river wall of the precipice.

Pauline seized the rope.  She alternately pulled and loosened it,
trying to hook the anchor to tree or shrub.  Suddenly she was flung
forward--almost out of the basket.  The balloon had stopped with a
jerk.  Hopefully, fearfully, she pulled in the rope.  The anchor held.
The balloon was tugging and swaying wildly, but its tether did not
break.  She looked down at the ledge.  Between her and that narrow
footing the only thoroughfare was two hundred feet of swaying rope.
She pulled upon the rope again.  She dropped two more of the heavy
ballast bags over the side, and the bag shook and groaned upon its
stays as it dragged the anchor deeper into the rock.  She put her feet
over the edge of the basket.  With her hands clutching the rim, she
lowered herself.  Taking her hands from the basket and grasping the
rope, she started down.

The raw hemp tore her hands.  The fearful strain upon her arms made her
sick and faint.  Only desperation nerved her after the first ten
yards.  The wrenching of the balloon whirled and jostled her.  At
first, holding only by her hands, she was flung out from the aft
halyard like a flag.  Then instinct told her to wrap her feet around it
and she trembled on.  She looked down once, saw the far swaying river,
and looked quickly up again.  It was not until her groping feet touched
the rock of the ledge that she opened her eyes again.  At the top of a
slender rope whirled and veered and battled a balloon with an empty
basket.  The sound of creaking ropes mingled in her ears with the
chugging of a motor car.  The chugging seemed a long way off, but its
noise seemed to make her dizzy.  She sank in a dead faint upon the
narrow ledge beside the hooked anchor.

"Pauline!  Pauline!  It's I--Harry.  Can't you hear me?  Pauline!"

There came no sound in answer--only the creaking of the balloon rope
in the air, the rasping of the anchor fluke upon the stone.

He sprang up and back to the motor and began throwing out the robes,
blankets, tools and chains.  He laid a blanket on the ground and began
to slash it into strips with his pocket knife.  In the ends of the
strips he cut slits and linked the slits with the chains to form a
rope.  He paused only once in his frantic labor.  That was when he
rushed back to the edge of the cliff to look again and call again-in
vain.  He fastened the chain at the end of his strange line to a
sapling growing some ten feet back of the verge and with a throb of
relief saw the other end drop to within a few feet of the unconscious
girl.  He tested the strength of the cable by pulling on it with all
his might.  It did not give.  He put himself over the cliff side and
began the descent.

Owen and Hicks had not only lost the balloon, but had lost Harry, too.
They could follow him only by the deep cut tracks of his flying car,
and these were as likely to be over marshes and fields as on the
highway.

More than once Hicks urged that they turn back.

"We can't do no good," he argued.  "If they ain't dead they ain't--
that's all."

"I've got to be sure," muttered Owen.

The little runabout had a hard fight to climb the cliff that Harry's
big car had taken so easily.  But as they came through the grove into
view of the balloon and the empty basket the two felt amply rewarded
for their worry and trouble and toil.

"By George, it has happened.  It's done!" cried Owen.  No artist gazing
on a finished masterpiece, no conqueror thanking the fates for victory
could have spoken with more triumphant fervor.

But Hicks was out of the machine and running to Harry's car.  He saw
the shreds of the blankets; he saw the knife; finally he caught a
glimpse of the chain that was fastened to the sapling.

"Don't be so sure," grumbled Hicks.  "Come on--but come quiet."

He got down on his hands and knees and crawled to the edge of the
cliff.  Owen followed him.  Together they drew back with gasps of
surprise and anger.

Hicks sprang to his feet.  His big-bladed knife flashed in his hand.
He sawed excitedly at the small chain.  A low curse escaped him as the
blade bent on the links.

Owen had dashed to Harry's auto.  He was back with a pair of heavy
pliers.  In a flash he had cut the chain.  The end of it shot over the
cliff.  There was a startled cry from below.

It was several minutes before Hicks and Owen looked down again.

The man they thought they had just killed and the girl whom they had
marked to die stood on the ledge in each other's arms, oblivious of
life or death, or foe or friend, of everything but love.

Pauline was still aquiver with the shock of her waking.  A cry ringing
above her had brought her from her swoon and she had looked up to see
the terrible balloon still reeling over her and to find Harry dangling
from a rope's end not ten feet away.

She rose weakly and stretched out her arms to him.

"Be still; don't move, dear," he called softly.

"You can't help me.  You--"

There was a sudden snapping sound from over the top of the cliff.  The
chain end of the line fell upon his shoulders.  He dropped joltingly to
the ledge and lunged forward toward a further fall.  It was the soft
arms of Pauline that caught and held him.  Both trembling a little as
their lips met.

From overhead came the sound of a starting automobile.  Harry shouted
at the top of his voice.  There was no answer.  He stopped quickly and
picked up the severed end of the life line.

"Look; it wasn't broken; it was cut;" he cried.  "Good heaven, Polly,
who is it that hates us like that?"

For answer she merely nestled nearer in his protecting arms.

They sat down on the ledge, and Harry's keen eyes watched the tantrums
of the balloon in the wind.  It was pulling fiercely toward the river
now, but the anchor held fast.

Suddenly Harry sprang up.  Pauline started to follow his example, but
he motioned her to stay where she was.  In his hand gleamed the
revolver, that he had carried ever since the battle in Baskinelli's
den.

"Who is it?" whispered Pauline.  "Can you see some one?"

He raised the revolver in the air, took aim and fired.  The balloon
rope at his feet suddenly slacked and he caught at its sagging loop to
gave the anchor from loosening.  He fired twice again at the balloon
bag, and Pauline, clinging to his shoulder saw the monster that had
held her a slave to its elemental power, that, like some winged gorgon
had held her captive in the labyrinth of air, crumple and wither and
fall at the prick of a bullet; saw it collapse into a mass of tangled
leather and rope and slide in final ruin down the smooth cliff.

She looked at Harry with the whimsical smile that she could not
suppress even on the dizzy heights of danger.

"Did you really think I would fly away again?" she asked.

"Hopeless ward," he said.  "Pitiful case.  Miss Pauline Marvin, crazy
heiress--thinks she's funny when she's merely getting killed.  No,
Miss Flippancy, I wanted a line to slide the rest of the way on," he
announced as he gave the anchor rope a twist around a rock.

Pauline's merriment vanished like a flash.

"Oh, I can't do it again, Harry, I can't," she cried tremulously.

"It will be easy this time," he told her.  "Here, give me your hands."

With a piece of the blanket rope he tied her wrists together, and
placed her arms about his shoulders, grasping a rope that sagged away
to the wrecked balloon on the road far below.  He placed a leg over the
ledge, wrapped it around the rope and bracing the other foot against
the rock wall, started joyously on his fearful task.

Joyously, for if ever man rejoiced at the gates of death it was Harry
Marvin.  To him the chance to risk his life today was a blessing and a
boon.  It was what he had prayed for, hopelessly, on the long motor
dash in the wake of the balloon--just the chance to try and save
her.  To die with her was all he asked; to die fighting for her was all
he wanted; and here he was, holding her in his arms on a stout rope,
already half way down the cliff.

At the bottom he let her feel the firm earth once more.  "Now you can
open your eyes," he said.

With his torn hands he started to lift her arms from his neck; but she
clung there, weeping.

"Oh, Harry, you are so patient, so good and brave, and I have made you
risk your life again for me."

"Sure; that's it; worry about me, now," he grumbled, although he held
her tenderly and close.  "When will you find out that my life doesn't
matter; it's yours that counts?"

"I will never, never do it again," said Pauline like a naughty child.

"You used to say that when you were four years old.  It was usually a
lie," said Harry.

"I love you," said Pauline irrelevantly.

"Then why-in-the-dickens-don't-you-marry me?" he demanded.

"Because--"

She stopped.  Steps sounded from the roadway.  They peered through the
thicket that concealed them and saw Owen approaching.

Pauline hailed him.  He turned toward the thicket in obsequious haste.

"Thank Heaven, Miss Marvin," he cried.  "It must be a miracle.  And you
are safe, too," he added, turning to Harry.

"How did you know I was ever in danger?" inquired Harry grimly.

"We heard shots," explained Owen.  "We saw the balloon fall and we knew
what you had done.  It was magnificent.  I congratulate you."

"Congratulate Polly," said Harry.  "She slid out of Heaven, while I
only slid down hill."

"Where is your car, Mr. Marvin?"

"Up on the hill--if the kind persons who cut the chain didn't take it
with them."

Owen did not change color.  "I will go and see if it is there.  If not,
I'll find Hicks and his runabout.  He's waiting somewhere about."

He set off briskly up the road.

"Polly, you still trust that man?" asked Harry.

"One has to trust one's guardian, doesn't one?"

He tossed his hands above his head in a gesture of  "Give it all up."

"That's right; keep 'em there," said a rough voice, and a wiry man with
white handkerchiefs tied over his face below the eyes sprang with
crunching strides through the bushes.  "Keep up your hands, I say," he
thundered at Harry, as he leveled a revolver.

Pauline was beside him and Harry dared not move.  But Pauline dared.
With the resourceful courage that always inspired her she whipped his
revolver out his hip pocket and fired at the intruder's head.

His hat fluttered off into the road.  He sprang at Pauline and wrested
the gun from her.  As Harry rushed him, he had no time to fire, but the
butt of one revolver crashed on the young man's forehead.  Harry sank
unconscious in the road.

Pauline knelt beside him.  She was screaming for Owen--even for
Hicks.  Hicks was instantly beside her but not to aid or rescue, for
Hicks was the man with the handkerchief mask.  He half dragged, half
carried Pauline to a thicket that concealed the runabout.  He drew a
roll of tire tape from under the seat and bound it cruelly around her
lips.  He took ropes and tied her hands and feet, placed her in the
seat beside him and started the machine.  If Harry, struggling to rise
out of the dust of the road, could have seen Pauline now, bound and
gagged beside Hicks in the runabout, he would have known her to be in
greater peril than ever the balloon had brought her.

Pauline was not long unhidden.  As the quick ear of Hicks caught the
sound of wheels, he grasped her roughly by the arm and thrust her into
the bottom of the machine.  Without taking his hand from the lever or
slackening speed, he pulled a blanket over her and tucked it in with
one hand.

"Don't move, either," he growled, "or you know."

A farmer on his wagon came around a bend.  His cheery "good morning"
brought only a grunt from Hicks, but the sound of the kind voice
thrilled Pauline.  She struggled under the blanket and almost reached a
sitting posture before Hicks crushed her back.

The runabout had flashed by, but the farmer had seen something that
alarmed even his stolid mind.

When a half mile up the road he came upon a young man, dazed and
wounded, staggering through the dust, he drew rein and leaped out.

A draught of whiskey from the farmer's bottle braced Harry.

"You passed them on the road?" he cried.

"A machine with a man in it and somethin' else--somethin' in the
bottom of it that moved," said the farmer.

"A horse," said Harry, "quick--one of yours will do."

The farmer hesitated.  Harry thrust money into his hand.  "Quick," he
shouted.

Together they unharnessed the team.  Coatless and hatless, tattered,
wounded and stained, Harry swung himself to the bare back of a
stirrupless steed and galloped out on what he knew was the most
dangerous of all the pathways of Pauline.





CHAPTER XII

THE OLD GRIGSBY HOUSE PAYS PENANCE

To young Bassett, of The American, the excitement of existence, since
he became a reporter and joined the jehus of the truth wagon, had
consisted mainly of "chasing pictures" in the afternoons and going to
strings of banquets at night.  He had no more enthusiasm for
photographs than he had for banquets.  Word painting and graining was
his art.  And so when a big story walked up and beckoned to him he was
as happy as a boy in love.

It had been a dull day for news.  The evening papers were barren of
suggestions and the assignments had run out before Bassett's name was
reached.  That meant another afternoon of dismal lingering in the
office, without even a photograph to chase.

Bassett flung himself disgustedly into a chair and straightened a
newspaper with a vicious crackle as the last of the other reporters
hurried out.  He thought he caught a gleam of merry pity in the
reporter's eye.  Never mind.  Let 'em laugh.  Let 'em wait.  One of
these days he'll be the one getting the real stuff and putting it
through, too, from tip to type, without a rewrite man or a copy reader
touching it.  Let 'em wait!

"In a balloon?  Where?"

The suddenly vibrant voice of the city editor talking over the
telephone caused Bassett to lower his paper and hushed even the chatter
of the office boys.

"Palisades--Panatella; yes.  Who's the girl?  You don't know?"

The paper dropped from Bassett's hands.

"Much obliged.  I'll have a man over there, but you go right ahead."
The city editor clicked down the receiver and whirled in his chair.

"Oh--Bassett.  Our Weehawken man says a young woman has been carried
off by Panatella's balloon.  They've lost the balloon.  Get a car and
get over there quick.  Go as far as you like, only find the girl and
let me hear from you--quick."

Bassett jumped to a phone and ordered a high-powered machine to meet
him at Ninety-sixth street.  He ran down William street, with his straw
hat under his arm, and dived into the subway.  An express had him at
Ninety-sixth street in a few minutes.  His machine was there.  They
dashed for the ferry and were on the aviation field before the
bewildered crowd that had witnessed the runaway flight of the balloon
had dispersed.

Bassett jumped out and mingled with the people.  They knew nothing
except the general direction toward the west that the balloon had
taken.  Automobilists had pursued for a long way, but had seen the gas
bag turn to the north and disappear in the hills.  The automobilists
had returned--most of them.  Two who had been with the girl before
she leaped into the basket had not returned.

Bassett got back in the car beside the driver, and they glided off on
the westward road.

Every one in the farm houses along the route had seen the balloon.  But
the houses were further and further apart as Bassett's course was drawn
northward and, often he missed the trail.

The trail was blazed by the wheel ruts of a giant touring car and a
small runabout that frequently left the highways and plowed across the
fields.  He lost them in the middle of a field that was marshy where
the automobiles left the road and rock-dry at the middle and further
side.  After a half-hour's maneuvering he ordered the driver to go back
to the road.

"Maybe they done the same thing--turned round an' come back,"
suggested the chauffeur.  "Hello, what kind of a rig is that?" he added
as a wagon appeared around a bend in the road.

The peculiar thing about the "rig" was that while it was a tongued
wagon with whiffletrees for two horses, there was only one horse.  The
driver, a bearded farmer, was urging the patient animal on, although it
was impossible for it to do more than plod in its awkward harness.

"What's the matter?" called Bassett, cheerily, as the machine drew
alongside and stopped.

"I dunno," replied the farmer, shaking his grizzled bead.  "Ef I was a
young feller like you I'd go right off an' find out."

"I'll go right away; what's up?"

"I dunno.  I ain't knowed anythin' like it in this part o' the country
in fifty year.  First, down yonder on the old river road I meets a
autymobile, with a man drivin' it and somethin' alive an' movin' lyin'
in a blanket by his feet.  I ain't got more'n a half mile back from
there when I finds a fine young feller, with his good clothes--what
he's got left--tore to pieces, no shoes, or hat on him, an' his head
bleedin' bad from cuts.  'Where are they?  Did you see a autymobile?'
he yells at me.  I tells him what I had saw, an' he takes my off hoss
there an' goes gallopin' up the road."

"What road?" cried Bassett.

"Ye circle this here field an' climb the hill, then take the first
turn."

"Which way?"

"West, if you don't want ter jump in the river."

"What, we're back at the river," gasped Bassett.

"That's about my luck.  The balloon's gone over the river; it's in New
York, and some Harlem reporter is leading it down to his office on a
leash to have it photographed, and I'm--I'm hoodooed, that's all."

"I dunno," said the farmer, "but ef ye ast me, I'd say that feller in
the autymoble was makin' for the woods beyond Quirksborough.  It's
lonely up through there, an' he had somethin' in that there machine
that he wanted to keep lonely, I'm guessin'."

Bassett motioned to the driver to go on.  "We might as well see what it
is; the balloon's gone home for supper," he said bitterly.

In five minutes they reached the turn where the farmer had last seen
Harry Marvin disappear.  They took the turn into an ill-kept,
dust-heavy road that had cast its blight of brown upon the reeds
bordering it.  The woods became more and more dense and the road more
narrow.  In some places the dust was crusted, as it had dried after the
last rain, and the men in the automobile could see that the wheels of
another machine and the hoofs of a galloping horse had plunged through
this crust but a short time before.

Around a bend in the road, going at full speed, Bassett sighted Harry
Marvin for the first time.  He stood up beside the driver and hailed
him, but Harry did not even turn around.  The beat of his horse's hoofs
drowned the sound.  The deep lines of the runabout's wheels in the dust
held his gaze and his senses to one thing alone--the rescue of
Pauline.  He urged the poor beast to its last tug of strength.  Weak
and dizzy from his wound, he knew that he could go but a little way
afoot.  The road's high, close-set wall of trees was broken for the
first time by a little clearing.  Harry's passing glance showed him
that there was a house in the clearing.  He was exhausted and a thirst,
but his eyes swept back to the wheel tracks on the road.

The runabout had gone on.  Harry, without drawing rein, was about to
follow.  But suddenly, weirdly, the rickety walls of the deserted house
gave forth a sound, a rattle and a crash, and from a shuttered window
beside the low-silled door bellied a sheet of smoke.

Harry reined the foaming horse and sprang off.  Freed of his weight,
the animal staggered on a few paces and fell, panting, in the dust.

Harry did not see it.  He was battering at the door of the burning
house.

Hicks could hardly be called a nervous or a timid man.  He was
certainly not a coward, like Owen; but neither did he have the shrewd,
scheming mind which was the bulwark of the craven secretary's
weakness.  At the moment when they discovered the young lovers safe at
the foot of the cliff after the escape from the balloon and rock ledge,
the two arch conspirators were two very different men.  Owen was
shaking like a leaf in his terror of discovery, but thinking of a
hundred schemes to save himself.  Hicks was deadly cool, and thinking
of just one thing--immediate and cold-blooded murder.

But now, although he thought he had killed Harry, although he knew he
had Pauline gagged and bound in the bottom of the runabout, Hicks was
afraid.  He was afraid of the incompleteness of the thing.  He was
eager to have done with the girl as well as with the man.  And now this
latest plan of Owen's was but another chapter of procrastination.

The incident of the farmer's curiosity had unnerved him, too.  He put
back over his face one of the white handkerchiefs that he had taken off
when he began the flight.

"There's no more 'pity-the-poor-girl' stuff in this," he said gruffly
to Pauline.  "If you don't keep quiet I'll kill you. I mean what I
say."

He still had the instinctive crook sense to conceal his natural voice.
Hicks was afraid, but as mile after mile fell behind them and the
westerning sun gave promise of the early shelter of dark, he began to
gain confidence.  He mumbled to himself reminiscently:

"The old Grigsby house, eh?  Nobody but--" he checked himself.
"Nobody but somebody would thought've that."

The "old Grigsby house," in front of which the runabout came to a stop
after many miles of travel, was set back from the road about three
hundred yards.  In front of it and on either side, the trees had been
cut away, but a tangle of riotous shrubbery lined the path to the
door.  Behind the house the trees had been left untouched, and now in
its tottering condition the venerable building literally rested on two
of the great elms, like an old man on crutches.

The windows were few and shuttered.  The black steel blinds were dead
as the eyes of a skull.  The steel was not rusted and only a little
weather-stained.

There were no steps to the door.  It opened on the ground level, with a
cracked board serving as both porch and foot mat.  The signs of
attempted preservation were what gave the place its ominous air.  There
was a menace in the steel shutters of the old Grigsby house, and in the
fact that the path to the door was kept clear.

Up this path Hicks carried Pauline.  Before he lifted her in his arms
he tested her bonds.  He did not know that Pauline was too terrified to
conceive the simplest plan of action.  Compared with the fear that
possessed her now the torturing suspense of the balloon flight seemed
like peace and safety.

Hicks held her with one arm while with the other he unlocked the low
door.  Swinging heavy on strong hinges, it opened into a narrow hall,
mildewed with the dampness of decay, the dust of disuse.  He carried
Pauline up the stairs, which groaned and bent under his steps and
pushed open a door.  There was a broken chair, a table, a cot, a
washstand, with pitcher and bowl, and a small oil lamp set in a bracket
on the wail.

Hicks laid Pauline on the cot, and lighted the lamp, using the same
match for a cigarette.  He seemed spurred by a desire to get away as if
the tottering, grimy halls held memories too grim for even his hardened
soul.  After testing the shutters of the window, which were locked on
the outside, he stepped back to the cot and cut Pauline's bonds, and
removed the bandage from her lips.  As she fell back in a half swoon he
hurried through the door, closed and locked it and went down the
stairs.

Half way down he stopped abruptly, stood for a moment listening, then
hastened on, dropping his cigarette over the banister.  He did not see
where it fell.  He did not care.  His only aim was to get out--to get
away.  He had heard a sound as he came down the stairs that turned his
fear to terror--it was the distant grumble of an automobile horn.  He
locked the door and sped down the bramble-walled path to the
runabout.  He had left it in the middle of the road, so that as he
leaped in and started again it left no swerve of its wheel ruts toward
the old Grigsby house.  It was five miles to the nearest town, but
Hicks made it in twenty minutes, and without hearing again the
threatening automobile horn.  The first thing he did was to telephone
to Owen.

For half an hour Owen had been locked in the library of the Marvin
house.  The events of the early afternoon, the failure of his best-laid
plans, the suspense of waiting the result of Hicks's final move, had
made him a nervous wreck.  He had lighted a dozen cigars and thrown
them away.  As many times he had picked up the telephone only to set it
down again without calling a number.  At last he had taken out the thin
tube of light pills, had drawn the shades, switched on the electric
lights, and sat down to wait for the half-peace that morphine brought
to his conscience.

As he leaned back in his chair, awaiting the effect of the drug, the
mummy in its case stood in front of him.  He closed his eyes in a
pleasant stupor.  He opened them in terror.  For a moment his hands
were outstretched in front of him, with claw-like fingers clutching at
thin air; then he covered his eyes with them to shut from view the
mummy, which stood over him, its upraised hand pointing to him the
finger of accusation; its woman's eyes blazing with anger; its cold
lips speaking a message that chilled his blood.

The telephone bell jangled again and again before Owen found courage to
open his eyes.  When he did so he clutched at the instrument, eager for
the sound of a human voice.

"Hello! . . . Yes, this is Owen . . ." He glanced apprehensively over
his shoulder at the mummy.  Its hand was lowered and it stood
motionless as before.  He turned excitedly back to the telephone.
"It's YOU!  Hicks? . . . What news?  . . . . She's at Grigsby's?
What do you mean?  Somebody after you? . . .  Not him? . . .  I
give you my word there hadn't been anything on that road for two
months. . . . What have you done?  What!  Nothing?  You should have
called the police from Jersey. . . .  All gone to pieces? . . .
Stay over there, I'll join you tonight.  Yes, go back to the house
and watch. . . . What? . . . All right."

Pauline, left alone, began to regain her courage.  After a few moments
she was able to stand up and move slowly about her prison room.  She
tried the door and the window shutters mechanically.  She searched the
room for something that might be used to batter down the door.  There
was nothing.  She sat on the cot and tried to think.

She sprang up again, trembling.  The dry, choking smell of smoke had
reached her.  Hicks's lighted cigarette had fallen among the wisps of
old wall paper in the hall.

She ran to the door.  Baffled, piteous, alone, she turned--and looked
on death.

For through the cracks in the floor flashed now the golden daggers of
flame in sheaths of stifling smoke.  She cowered, choking, by the outer
wall of the room.

The flame daggers grew into scimitars.  The inner wall caught fire.
There was no outlet for the suffocating smoke.

She sprang to the middle of the room and seized the broken chair.  With
all her might she crashed it against the door.  It fell in pieces at
her feet.

She picked up a leg of the chair and, running to the window, pounded
upon the shutters.  She screamed, and beat upon the shutters.  It was
the rattle and crash upon the shutters that made Harry rein in his
horse before the old Grigsby house.

He saw smoke burst from the lower windows, and, battering on the locked
door, he heard her screams.

"Harry!  Harry!"

It was to him she called again in her peril, as she had called before
--in the wreck of the yacht, in the den of Baskinelli, and even this
day from the rim of the runaway balloon.  Always, inspired by that
call, he had found their way to safety.

He thrust the full weight of his mighty body against the door which
held like solid rock.

"Harry!  Harry!" came the cries again.

"I'm coming, Polly; I'm here!"

He dashed to where a heavy tree limb had fallen, carried it to the
door, raised it and charged with it as a battering ram.  He might as
well have slapped the door with his flat palm.

He looked at the windows whence the smoke poured--smoke mingled with
flame.  Half crazed by the cries from above, he raised the limb to try
to break the shutters.  He stopped and let it fall.  The toot of an
automobile horn and the excited voice of young Bassett stopped him.

"What's doing?" gasped the reporter.  "Is anybody in there?"

Harry pointed to the shuttered window of the upper room.  The cries
came again, and with the sound, of the woman's voice Bassett turned
sick.  He made a dizzy charge at the door, but Harry caught him back.

"All three together," he said.

They flung their strength at the portal--but still it held.

Bassett turned away, sobbing.  He looked up to see Harry spring into
the big car which he forced through the brambles.

"What are you doing?  You're crazy!" yelled the chauffeur, running
toward the machine.

"Get her--if I can't--after the smash!" was Harry's answer.  The
car lunged on at full speed.

The impact rocked the burning house.  Frame and door crashed down
together before the battering car.  It plowed for half its length into
the smoke and fire, stopped an instant, quivered and backed out again,
splendid ruin.

On Harry's forehead a deep cut streamed.

Bassett sprang to catch him, but he climbed out unhelped.  Together
they leaped the shattered wall.  Through searing smoke they climbed the
quaking stairs and burst into the shuttered room.

The lamp still flickered dimly in its bracket.

"Pauline," called Harry, chokingly, "Pauline, answer me."

There was no answer.

On hands and knees he groped over the hot floor.  He found her by the
window, where she had fallen.  And flames choked them as they fled.

Outside he knelt beside her, chafing her hands, when she wakened.  He
had turned her so that she did not see the towering glare of the flames
as the old Grigsby house furnished burnt penance for its crimes.
Pauline raised her arms and touched tenderly his bleeding brow.  He
lifted her into the car that Bassett and the driver had patched up.

"Home, James," said Bassett, with a tired grin, "but stop at a telephone
somewhere and let me tell my boss that I've got a piece for the paper."





CHAPTER XIII

DOUBLE CROSS RANCH

"I tell you, Harry, I can't endure it.  I couldn't face anyone I know.
I want to run away--far, far away, where nobody ever heard of
balloons or automobiles, or me."

"Polly, you aren't afraid of a little talk, are you?  Everyone is
saying how brave you were, and, here, when the danger's over, I find
you a flimsy little coward!"

She picked up one of a pile of newspapers that lay on the stand beside
her, and thrust it before Harry's eyes with a manner at once
questioning and rebuking.  He read the head lines:

    SOCIETY GIRL CARRIED
            OFF IN BALLOON

    Miss Pauline Marvin Has Remarkable Experience
            After Accident on Palisades.

Harry laughed and patted her hand reassuringly. "Oh, but that's only
one of them," wailed Pauline.  "Look at this one:

    PAULINE MARVIN
            LOST IN THE SKY

"Can any woman live after that," she cried.

"Why, it's no crime to be lost in a balloon," said Harry.  "See, they
tell it just as it was--they make you a real heroine."

"A man might live it down, dear, but a woman, never!  To be 'lost in
the sky' is altogether too giddy.  Margaret!" she called.

The maid stepped quickly forward.

"You may pack my things, Margaret, and be sure to put in some warm
winter ones.  Is the snow on mountains cold like real snow, or is it
like the frosting on cake?" she inquired, turning again to Harry.

"What are you up to this time?" he demanded.

"Montana first," she proclaimed with a melodramatic flourish.  "And if
I am followed by my fame or by my relatives--I shall go on--to the
end of the world."

Harry had long ago abandoned the idea of laughing at her whims.  Even
the most fantastic of her projects was serious to her.

He merely looked at her in mute suspense awaiting the fall of the
blow.

"You needn't begin to see trouble-yet," she laughed.  "But I am going,
Harry.  I'm going to accept Mary Haines's invitation and visit her and
her nice, queer husband on their ranch.  You remember Mrs. Haines, that
dear Western girl that we met on the steamer when she was on her
honeymoon?"

"Well, it's pretty tough just at this time," objected Harry.  "Business
is bothersome, and I ought to be here; but if you insist . . . "

"Oh, you're not coming with me," stated Pauline, cheerily.  "In the
first place you are not invited, and in the second place you are not
needed in the least.  Now get me a telegraph blank."

He came back with the desired paper and a fountain pen and she
scribbled:

Mrs. Mary Haines, Rockvale, Montana.  Care Double Cross Ranch.

Arrive Thursday at 8 a.m.  Will explain haste when see you.,

Pauline Marvin."

"Run down and 'phone that to the telegraph office," she told Harry.
"And now for the packing, Margaret."  She thrust a tiny foot in a pink
slipper over the edge of the bed.

"But you are ill, Miss Marvin," protested the nurse with a first faint
assertion of authority.

"That's so," said Polly.  "How can we get around that?  Oh, yes; it's
time for your airing, dear--and when you come back I shall be well
and packed."

"Plenty of air," suggested Harry sarcastically from the doorway, "if it
takes you as long to pack as it does to put on your hat."

Pauline flung him a laughing grimace and he strode off to the library.
As he was repeating the brief message to the telegraph office he did
not hear the light footfalls that ceased at the library door, nor could
he see the drawn, gray face of Owen who heard the message spoken over
the telephone, and was passing up the stairs with his slow, dignified
tread when Harry came into the hall.

"Good morning, Mr. Harry.  I see you are quite yourself again.
Yesterday was a terrible day."

"You do look done up," retorted Harry, curtly, as he picked up his
hat.

Owen's step was not slow or dignified after the door shut upon Harry.
He sprang up the last stairs and into his own room.

Here on a small writing desk was another telephone.  He snatched it up
nervously and gave the call number of the place where he had held his
first conference with Hicks.

He held a brief conversation over the wire, snapped down the receiver,
sprang to a wardrobe for his hat and stick and hurried from the house.

The dullness that a sleepless night had left in his eyes had
disappeared.  The fear that had shaken him ever since the uncanny
reappearance of Harry and Pauline was dissipated, or at least concealed
by a new hope--a new plan of destruction.

He knew only that Pauline was going away and that she must be followed
--no matter whither her whims might lead.

Hicks was seated in a corner of the rendezvous drinking whiskey and
water.  He was plainly in a black mood.

"You got a pretty fat roll yesterday, Hicks. But," Owen drew out his
wallet, "here is a little.  Get yourself ready to make a trip
tomorrow.  I'll let you know the time and the train."

Hicks looked covetously at the bills, but he demurred: "You mean we're
after them two again!"

"Hicks, we must be after them because one of them will soon be after
us."

"Where they goin' now?"

"Rockvale, Montana.  That is, the girl's going.  What I haven't found
out yet is whether Harry goes, too.  If he stays here, I'll stay, and
you'll go West."

"After Pauline?"

"Ahead of her!"

"And then what?"

"Then you will have to use your own judgment.  But don't get excited
and kill her, Hicks."

He accompanied the sharp warning with the alleviating roll of
yellowbacks, which Hicks quickly deposited in an inside pocket.

The next morning they shook hands at the gate of the Pennsylvania
station.  Hicks looking a bit uncomfortable but much improved, in a
suit of new clothes, and carrying a suitcase, hurried to catch the
flyer for the West.  A few hours later Owen was wishing a happy journey
to Pauline at the same station rail.

Mary Haines stood in the low doorway of the Double Cross ranch house
and gazed down the sun-baked road to where, in the far distance, a
little wisp of dust was visible.

Laughing, she turned and called to someone inside the house.  A
towering, slow-moving, but quick-eyed man, in a flannel shirt, with
corduroys tucked into the tops of spurred boots, appeared on the
stoop.  Hal Haines was so tall that his broad-brimmed hat grazed the
porch roof of the house.

"Hal!  Hal!" she cried eagerly.  "What do you think?  Pauline Marvin is
coming to visit us--Pauline Marvin!"

"The little girl we met on the ship that I had to yarn to about the
wild West?"

"Yes, of course.  How you did lie to her!  Goodness, I hope that's not
why she's coming.  She'll be awfully disappointed."

"Oh, I don't know as it's necessary to disappoint her," said Haines.
"If the State of Montana don't know how to entertain a lady from the
East as she likes to be entertained it's time to quit bein' a State at
all."

"Hal!"  Mrs. Haines eyed her husband sternly.  "I want you to remember
who Pauline Marvin is.  I'm not going to have her frightened by any of
your wild jokes."

Haines burst into a ringing laugh.

"Honest, my dear, I promised that young lady if she ever came to
Rockvale she'd see all the Wild West I told her about.  I gave her my
word.  You don't want to make me out a liar, do you?"

"You can say that conditions have changed greatly in the last two
years."

"Oh, come, just one little hold-up the day she gets here.  She'll think
it's great.  She'll think she's the lost heiress that was carried off
in the mountains--the one I told her about."

"I tell you I will not hear a word of it.  She may be ill or something;
it would scare her to death."

"I'll ask her if she's ill before I let the boys rob the buck-board.
What dye say, mother?  Just this once."

His boyish joy in the prank brought laughter to her eyes, and he knew
that his sins would be condoned.

Four days later Hicks, who looked as far from home in his excellent
clothes as the clothes looked far from home in Rockvale, alighted, from
a lumbering local train.  He made an inquiry of a man on the platform,
and, carrying a heavy suitcase, slouched up the main street of the
town.

Ham Dalton's place was the one the man had directed him to, and Hicks,
I after engaging the best rooms in the house for seventy-five cents,
scrubbed a little of the dust of travel from his person and went down
to the bar and gambling room.  The drink of whiskey he got made even
his trained throat writhe, and he strolled over to the poker table to
join a group of calm and plainly-armed spectators of high play.

From the conversation he learned that the dam at Red Gut was washed
out; that Case Egan, a noted rancher, was in jail for shooting a deputy
sheriff, and that Hal Haines was expecting a "millionairess gal"
visitor from New York.

"When'll she be on?" drawled one of the players.

"Tomorrow's express."

"Sence when did the express stop at Rockvale?"

"Sence the president o' the road told it to stop for this here young
person," replied the informant crushingly.

Hicks was scanning the faces of the men about him with a purposeful
eye.  Especially he watched one--a lean man in red shirt and leather
breeches, booted and spurred, who stood near the table.

Hicks approached him.  "Hello, Patten," he said.

The man whirled so sharply that the revolver he had drawn, in whirling,
caught in Hick's coat and jerked him into the middle of the room.  The
poker game went on without a sound or sign of interruption.  The
bartender took a casual look at Hicks and the gunman, then went on
talking to a customer, as before.

"Hello, Hicks," said Patten, putting up the gun.  "I'm much obliged
that I didn't kill you.  We don't greet old friends quite so hasty out
here, boy, as you do in New York--especially when we haven't heard
our right name in some years," he added in a lowered voice.

"How long have you been here, Pat?"

"Eight-nine-twelve years; ever since that friend of yours, Mr. Owen,
paid me $10,000 for getting rid of a certain--what he called a
certain obstacle."

"Which you didn't get rid of?"

"No, he made the mistake of paying me in advance, and it didn't seem
necessary to harm anybody."

"Got any of the money left?"

The lean gunman held his head back and guffawed.

"It's near here, I guess, but it ain't mine.  It dropped between this
bar and that table."

"Do you want a little job?" asked Hicks.  "But let's go in the back
room."

They strolled into an empty wine room and ordered drinks.

"What kind of a job?" asked Patten.

Hicks leaned across the table and whispered rapidly.  His old
acquaintance drew back, with a sudden suspicion.

"But no foolin' this time," warned Hicks.  "Only part money in
advance."

He produced $5,000 in bills from his trousers pocket, but secreted it
again quickly as the waiter appeared.

Patten got up and sauntered out into the barroom, returning presently
with three men of his own brand--broad-built, grim-eyed ruffians of
the far north country--three of Case Egan's cattlemen.

In the meantime Mrs. Haines was flustered not only by the prospect of
meeting her distinguished friend, but by the tumultuous staging of the
great hold-up scene that was to mark Pauline's welcome.  Hal had been
up at three o'clock in the morning rehearsing the boys in their parts.
He had set off at five o'clock for the station.

As Pauline, trim in her traveling suit of gray and blithe in the clear
Western air, tripped from the express, all Rockvale was there to meet
her.  Hal Haines, mighty man that he was in the region, was red with
pride as the girl who could stop the express at Rockvale gave him her
hand in happy greeting.

As he helped her into the two-seated buckboard, no one in the crowd
noticed the man who had arrived the night before standing on the
platform and pointing out the girl to Tom Patten who was seen to mount
and ride rapidly away.

"I hope you saved some of that lovely Wild West for me, Mr. Haines,"
said Pauline, as the finest pair of horses in the Double Cross stable
whisked them along the road to the ranch.

"Very little left, Miss Marvin--very little left; still--whoa,
there!  What's this?"

At a bend in the road five masked and mounted men had dashed from cover
and quickly surrounded the buckboard with a small circle of leveled
gun-barrels.

Pauline had time to cry out only once before she felt herself gripped
by powerful hands and dragged from the wagon seat, where Hal Haines sat
shaking with laughter.  He stood up and started to draw his revolver
slowly.  From behind him a lasso was thrown lightly and the noose
tightened around his arms.

He kept on laughing, although he was a little afraid the boys were
overdoing matters.  He knew his wife would never forgive him for this
actual kidnapping of Pauline--he certainly had never intended it.

And she was really frightened.  He could tell that by her cries as she
was thrust across the pommel of the masked leader's horse and the horse
was spurred to a tearing gallop down the road.

Haines tried to shout a command and call the joke off, but the riders
had all followed after their leader, and he was alone in the
buckboard.

"They needn't have been so realistic with their knots," he said, as he
struggled to free himself from the rope.

It was ten minutes before he wriggled free.  He picked up the lines and
drove on toward the ranch--a little nervous now over the receptions
he would get, but still laughing.

At the fork where the road to the mountains left the main highway,
Haines flashed out his revolver in real excitement.  Another group of
five masked men had driven their horses out of a clump of small trees.
They fired their revolvers as they surrounded the buckboard.  Then
suddenly discovering that there was no woman passenger, they tore off
their masks and came up with quick, eager inquiries.

Perhaps for the first time in his life Hal Haines knew what fear was--
not fear for himself, but for another.

"Boys, there was another party on the road.  They took her.  I took 'em
for you," he said in a stifled voice.  "Come on.  Cabot, give me your
horse; take the rig back and tell Mrs. Haines."

He sprang into the saddle, and, filling their revolvers as they rode,
the band of jesters, who had suddenly turned so grimly serious, dashed
back toward town.

Two miles from where Tom Patten had swung Pauline to his saddle bow
they picked up the train hoofs that left the road and made toward the
mountains.

The men who had set out so gaily a few hours before rode silently,
fiercely now.  Mile after mile swept behind them as they held to the
trail.  Sometimes it followed the roads, sometimes it broke over open
country.  At last it reached the hills and stopped at the river.

Patten's band had ridden in the water upstream.  After a mile of it the
leader ordered three of them out on the south side.  They left
silently, rode five miles across country and separated, each taking a
different route.  Patten and one companion kept on with Pauline who was
now almost insensible.  At last they left the stream on the north bank
and climbed into the higher hill country where they entered a thicket
and stopped.

"Here we are," said Patten.  His companion dismounted and lifted
Pauline from the other's saddle.

With a swift daring and dexterity, born of fear, she flung aside his
arms and sprang toward the horse he had just left.  She tried to mount,
but her strength was gone.  They tied her feet with a rope and seated
her on a great fallen tree, while they cleared away a tangle of bushes
and began to tug with their combined strength at a giant rock, which
the bushes had concealed.

The stone moved inch by inch until behind it Pauline saw, with a chill
shudder, the black opening of a cave.

She flung herself from the log pleading piteously.  They cut the rope
that bound her feet and led her to the cave.  As the giant stone was
rolled back into its place she uttered one wild far-echoing cry.  Then
darkness!

For many minutes Pauline lay prostrate.  A dim light from some hidden
orifice in the top of the cave behind a shelving wall, seemed to become
brighter as her eyes became more accustomed to the shadows.  She arose
and began to inspect the cave.

It was a chamber of rock about forty feet long and twenty feet wide.
The bottom and roof converged slightly towards the end farthest from
the giant boulder that formed the door.  But even there the cave was
twenty-five feet high.

The boulder door was set into the rock portal, and not a wisp of light
came through the brush that, covered the crevice.  Pauline, after a
brief hopeless test of her frail strength against the weight of the
granite mass, moved slowly along the wall to the extremity of the
chamber.

Here, about seven feet from the floor, ran a ledge of rock, between two
and three feet in width; and, from this ledge upward the wall slanted
at an angle of forty-five degrees to a wide shelf or fissure.  It was
from this fissure that the faint light came.

Pauline groped her way back along the other wall to the front of the
cave again.  Despairing, she sat down on the chill stone.  The events
of the last few hours had left her in a state of mental vertigo.  The
hold-up of the buckboard and her carrying off by the bandits seemed
fantastically impossible.

So this was her "escape" from scenes of adventure.  This was the
"great, safe, quiet West," where she should forget her perils in New
York and wait for others to forget them.  She thought of her promise to
Harry that she would not try to get into any more scrapes.  In her
former dangers--even when there seemed hope--she had a buoying
trust that there was one man who could save her.  He had always saved
her.  In his protecting shelter she had come to feel almost immune from
harm.  But with Harry three thousand miles away and totally ignorant of
her need of him no sense of imagined protection sustained her now.  She
took it for granted that Mr. Haines had been made a prisoner or
killed.  She knew the word would reach Mrs. Haines and the latter would
invoke all the powers in the State to find her; but she was, sure she
would be dead before anyone unearthed this fearful hiding place.

The light at the far end of the cave grew steadily more dim and Pauline
judged that the day was waning.

A rustling sound caught her ear.  Sounds are animate or inanimate.
This was unmistakably the sound of a living thing.

Pauline trembled a little but she stood up.  Was it man or beast that
she had for companion in the mysterious cave?

She took a faltering step forward.  The sound seemed to come nearer.
The cave had gone almost pitch dark, and, suddenly, from the mid-level
of the back wall--from the rock ledge--there flashed upon the sight
of the imprisoned girl two beady, burning eyes.





CHAPTER XIV

THE GREAT WHITE QUEEN

Hal Haines' best driving team was lathered with foam and the buckboard
swung through the gate on two wheels as Bill Cabot drove back to the
Double Cross Ranch.

The young cowboy whom Haines had ordered to carry the news of disaster
to Mrs.  Haines, seeing the buckboard and only Cabot driving, knew
instantly that something had gone wrong.

"What is it, Will?" she called, running down to the gate.  "Didn't she
come?  Has anything happened to Hal?"

"She was held up and carried off, Mrs. Haines."

"I know; I know.  You played the joke; but what happened?" She looked
at the foaming horses.  "What made you drive home like this?" she
demanded.

"She wasn't carried off by us, Mrs. Haines.  Some other crowd got ahead
of us--some crowd that meant what they was doing.  The Boss and the
boys has got the trail by this time, I guess.  The Boss said I should
come and tell you."

For a moment Mrs. Haines looked at him in doubt.

"Is this another joke, Will?" she asked.  "There hasn't been a hold-up
in this section for ten years."

"I guess the jokin' is all knocked out've all of us," answered Bill,
turning shamefacedly away.  "No, ma'am, this is the truth and--and I
wish the Boss had took some one else's horse instid of mine."

"Never mind.  They'll have all the men in Montana out to find that
girl, if this isn't a hoax," cried Mrs. Haines in a voice that choked.
"Go tell the other boys to get ready.  The Sheriff will want them, if
Hal doesn't."

She sped back to the house and with a trembling hand rang the bell of
the old-fashioned telephone that furnished a new blessing to the
ranches.

A moment later Curt Sikes, the telegraph operator at Rockvale, almost
fell from his chair as he took the following message over the wire at
Mrs. Haines's dictation:

Harry Marvin,

Fifth Avenue, New York:

Pauline kidnapped. Come at once.

Mary Haines.

"What--what's it mean, Mrs. Haines?" he gasped into the transmitter.
"It ain't the young lady that Hal Just took off the express, is it?"

"Yes, that's who it is, Curt.  Cabot and the boys are coming into town
as fast as they can ride; but you call Sheriff Hill and get as many men
as you can-in case we need them.  You'll hurry, won't you, Curt?"

"Yes, ma'am; and I'll get your message right on the wire.  They'll put
it ahead all along the line."

If Curt's speed in getting the telegram away was inspired partly by
burning need of telling the news to Rockvale that did not reflect on
Curt.  He flashed after the New York message a terse call up and down
the line to "Find the Sheriff," and then bolted out to the platform.
His shout was heard not only at the little hotel across the street from
the station, but at the city limits of Rockvale a good mile away.
Rockvale answered the shout as a clan answering the beacozes flare.
When Curt Sikes shouted it meant news.

His messages along the line had little effect.  He had spent the
morning flaunting the news to fellow operators and rival communities
that the Express had stopped at Rockvale.  They had only half believed
that, and now this added flourish was too much.  Even Sheriff Hill,
whom the message overtook at Gatesburg, fifteen miles south, laughed
when he read it, and started for Rockvale only because he was going
there anyway to get Case Egan.

"There ain't much doubt which is now our leadin' city--Butte or
Rockvale," he remarked as he swung to his saddle and set off with two
deputies.

He found something more than overdone home town pride in Rockvale,
however.  The narrow streets were filled with men, women and curious,
wide-mouthed children.  Horses, packed for long riding, with rifles
bolstered to the saddles, were tied all along the rails of both the
main hotel and the station.  Curt Sikes was the center of a changing
but ever interested group, but two of the Haines posse who had just
come in without any report of capture, but with all the vivid news of
the hold-up were now the main objects of attention.

Briefly they told the story of the pursuit.  With Haines leading they
had struck a trail that took them to the river.  They had waded the
river and found no trail on the other side.  Knowing the bandits had
taken to the middle of the stream, Haines had divided his party.  He
sent two men down stream, one on each side and he and the three others
rode up stream, two on each side.

After long rough riding Haines had found a trail coming out of the
water.  All four had followed it a long way.  There were three bandits
making the trail, but the three stopped and each took a different
direction, one straight up into the hills, one straight down into the
valley, and the other off here towards town.  Haines and one man had
started on the trail to the hills.  The other two--the two talking
now--had each taken one of the other trails, but had lost them.  They
thought Haines would lose his, too.  It had been a clean, up-to-date
expert piece of work--this kidnapping.  The getaway had been a work
of art, just as the hold-up had been a wonder-piece of stage setting.

"You saw all the gang that held you up?" asked the Sheriff.

"We wasn't held up--tha'd a been a little too rich, I guess," said
one of the cowboys.  "It was Boss Haines an' the girl that was
stopped."

"Well, then, I mean did Haines see the gang?  Were any of them
Indians?"

"Injuns?  No.  The Boss thinks some of 'em were cattle-crooks from the
Case Egan outfit.  I guess they ain't no Montana Injuns that'd start
anythin' like that."

"You guess a lot more than you know," said the Sheriff quietly.  "I may
be calling on any of you boys for some fast work against old Red Snake
any of these days."

"What's the trouble, Sheriff?"

"Oh, just one of their devils brewing bad medicine again up at
Shi-wah-ki village.  Red Snake always was a little bit crazy--talking
about the thieving white man that stole his country and looking for a
chance to get the rest of his people killed off."

"I heard that down at Hallick's last week," drawled a man in the crowd.
"The Sioux is only waitin' for the Great White Queen to come out o' the
heart o' the airth an' lead 'em on the warpath.  They got a surprisin'
plenty o' arms, too, for reservation Injuns.  Know that, Sheriff?"

The Sheriff nodded slowly.  "I wish Haines would get in," he said.
"I'd like to have a talk with him before we start.  But it's getting
late."

The dull thudding of tired horses hoofs from the other side of the hill
below town came, to him as an answer.  Presently Haines and his
companion joined, silently, the eager crowd at the station.

The owner of the Double Cross seemed to have aged ten years since he
had driven away with Pauline from that same station platform only a few
hours before.  He would have given all the acres of the Double Cross
for just a word about Pauline; he would have given his life to know
that she was alive.

"There's nothing for it, Sheriff, but to rake the whole country," he
said wearily.  "They've hidden her somewheres, if they haven't killed
her.  And if they've killed her, mind, it's me you're to hang for it."

The Sheriff laid a strong hand on his old friend's shoulder.  "I can
get the state militia out to look for that girl, Hal," he said.  "By
the way, is there anything--anything queer about her?" he asked.

"What do you mean?"

"Why, only that her folks have been writing to the Governor at Helena.
Sikes just gave me this from Governor Casson himself.  Who is this
Raymond Owen?  Who's been wiring to the Governor?"

"That's her guardian, I think.  H'm," mused Haines as he read the
message, "that is queer.  I wish they'd have wired me that yesterday."

The Sheriff folded the telegram and putting it back in his pocket,
stepped up on a box near the hotel door.

"I want to call for a hundred volunteer citizens to go hunt this girl,"
he announced.

A minute later, all that was left of Rockvale was the buildings and the
women, children and old men who stood watching a cloud of dust blotting
the sunset glow and listening to the retreating clatter of a flying
cavalcade.

Sikes kept the office open late.  At 7 o'clock he telephoned to Mrs.
Haines at the Double Cross:

"What does he say?" she cried.

"Just one word--Comin'," said Curt in an aggrieved voice.  "He
could've sent ten words fer the same price," he grumbled.

Red Snake was one of the younger chiefs of the Sioux.  He was too young
to have had a share in the bloody last stand of his race in their
Montana wilderness; but he was old enough to have watched the dwindling
of spirit and power among them for twenty years.

And every day of watching kindled new hate in the breast of the
Indian.  In him the spirit of his fathers had left the old unquenchable
belief in the Day of Restoration, when, by some supernatural
intervention, the Indians would return to their lands, the lands revert
to their primeval state, and civilization be lost in the obliterating
wilderness.

The officers of the Agency had had trouble with Red Snake on several
occasions.  Twice he had started out at the head of war parties and had
been caught just in time to prevent bloodshed among the isolated
settlers.  But of late he had been docile and peaceful.  The new
disturbances--the occasional shooting of a cowboy and the petty
stealing of cattle dated from the beginning of the sway of a new
medicine man in Red Snake's principal village of Shi-wah-ki.

His name was of many syllables in the native language, but he was known
as Big Smoke.  He was a young Indian who had spent some years among the
whites in the Southwest, had made a pretense at getting an education,
but had reverted violently to the life and faith of his fathers.  Big
smoke had predicted to Red Snake the coming of the Great White Queen,
who would empower the arms of the red man to overthrow the whites and
would make him again master of his rightful lands.

Red Snake, squatted on a blanket beside his teepee, listened with
immobile features but with a thrilled heart.  He summoned a council of
the chiefs, secretly, and the medicine man addressed his message to
them also.

Thereafter the Indians of Shi-wah-ki were restive.  Their growing
spirit of rebellion manifested itself in foolish little offenses
against the white men.  These were punished with the white man's
customary sternness and this increased the rancor of the Indians.  It
increased, too, their eagerness for the fulfillment of the strange
prophecy of the coming of the White Queen.

On the very day when the white man's village of Rockvale was in a
hubbub of excitement because of the kidnapping of Pauline, the village
of Shi-wah-ki was tumultuous with a different fervor.

Into the circle of the assembled chiefs, rimmed with awed faces of
squaws and papooses, had danced the weird figure of Big Smoke.  He had
been called upon by Red Snake to announce what further of the White
Queen his medicine had revealed.

Big Smoke wore the head of a wolf with cow's horns set over the ears.
His lithe red body was covered with a long bear skin.  His legs were
bare to the tops of his gaily beaded moccasins.

He circled the silent group with fantastic gyrations and stopped
finally in the center.  Lifting his hands, he addressed the tribe.
First, in glowing rhetoric, he pictured the ancient glory of the Sioux
--their wealth in lands, their prowess in the hunt, their triumph over
all other red men.  He told of their long and brave struggle with the
white man, who by the intervention of wicked gods had been enabled to
conquer them.  But the time of vengeance and retribution had come after
long years.  The Indian was to return to his own.

"The Great Spirit is sending us a leader," said Rig Smoke.  "The Great
Spirit has spoken to me and said: 'Lo, I will send a White Queen with
golden hair.  She shall come from the heart of the Earth, and she shall
lead your warriors against the oppressor."

This was the third time Big Smoke had said this.  That was what made it
most impressive to the listeners.  Big Smoke had staked not only his
reputation as a medicine man, but, also his life, upon this wonderful
prediction, which had aroused his people as they had not been aroused
in fifty years.  For it was the law of the ancient code that
fulfillment must follow immediately the third announcement of the
miracle.  If fulfillment failed there remained only the Great Death
Stone in the valley.  No prophet of the tribe had ever won in the
race with the Death Stone.

And so the chiefs sat in respectful silence and the young braves arose
eager for the war dance when Big Smoke finished speaking.

The dance, beginning slowly, waxed wilder; the tom-toms beat more
vibrantly, until the whole village was encircled by the painted and
bonneted tribesmen.  The red glare of daylight fires illuminated the
wild faces.  The women cowered with their children beside the teepees.
In the midst of the tumult, the medicine man stood with hands stretched
upward calling on the Great Spirit to send the White Queen.

When the dance had subsided, the Council resumed its deliberations.

It was arranged that there should be a hunt that afternoon and the
foxes or coyotes should be driven as near as possible to the
settlements.  This would be a means of reconnoitering and it would make
the whites think the Indians were engaged in peaceful pursuits.

Pauline, after her first startled cry, stood spellbound by the two
glowing eyes that shone from the far end of the cave.

There was no light now--save for the eyes.  The rift in the roof from
which the mysterious glow had come seemed to have been closed
suddenly.  The pitch darkness made the eyes doubly terrible, and just
perceptibly they moved and flashed which showed they were living eyes.

Pauline longed to scream, but could not.  Behind those fiery points
imagination could picture all manner of horrible shapes.  Was the
creature about to spring upon her?

The eyes vanished as suddenly as they had appeared.

The low rustling sound came again; then the utter silence.

Pauline, freed of the uncanny gaze, was able to think and act.  If that
animal could find its way into her prison house, there must be another
entrance to the cave.

It was plain that the animal had been crouching on the slant rock above
the ledge.  Pauline began again to grope around the wall.  She could
touch the top of the ledge and now in several places she found small
crevices in the wall by which she tried to climb.

Time and again she fell back.  Her soft hands were torn by the jagged
rock; her dress was in shreds; her golden hair fell down upon her
shoulders.  She might have been some preternatural dweller of the
place.

At last her foot held firm in a crevice three feet above the floor.
Clutching the ledge-top, she groped for another step--and found it.
In a moment she was on the ledge.

She sank there, covering her face with her hands.  The eyes had blazed
again scarcely three feet away.  She felt the breath of hot nostrils,
the rough hair of a beast, as the thing sprang.  She felt that the end
had come, but she still clung to the ledge.

As she uncovered her eyes, slowly, she was astonished to see that the
faint light had returned.  It came, as she had thought, over a
concealed shelf of stone above the rocky incline.

The eyes had vanished.  The cave was still.

She began to scale the incline.  Her hands and feet caught nubs and
slits of the surface and a little higher she felt the cool dampness of
earth and grasped the root of a tree.  As she drew herself up, she
looked over the shelf and saw, at one end of it, the open day.

She crawled a little way upon the shelf then stopped.  She hardly dared
to go on.  What if the opening, large enough to admit the light, were
too small for her to pass through?  What if the light had been only a
lure to torture her?  What if she must return into the darkness with
that thing unknown, the thing with the blazing eyes!

She crept on with her eyes shut.  A stronger glow of light upon the
closed lids told her she had reached the end of the shelving.  The next
moment would tell her if she had reached freedom or renewed captivity.
She looked up.

Three of Red Snake's young warriors had gained most of the plaudits of
the village during the afternoon of the hunt.  They rode together and
not only did they bring in many foxes and coyotes but much news of the
white people.  They had met armed men throughout all the mountain
country, riding up and down the river.  The armed men had greeted them
fairly and had asked them for information of other white men who had
stolen a girl and carried her away.  The white men were thus fighting
among themselves.  It was a propitious time for the coining of the new
Queen.

These three young men, about five o'clock in the afternoon, had just
started the drive of a coyote towards the level country when the quarry
doubled suddenly and turned into the hills.

With shouts and shots, the Indians pursued it, but their horses were no
match for it on the devious wooded paths, and grunting their disgust
they saw it dive into a burrow in a rocky hollow of the cliff.

They dismounted and stood about the mouth of the burrow grumbling and
"cursing their luck" in an ancient tongue.  At last two of them mounted
and started to ride away, and their companion followed, slowly, leading
his horse.

A sound made him turn his head.  With a cry of mingled fear and joy, of
awe and triumph, he threw himself prostrate before the mouth of the
burrow.

The other Indians dashed back.  They literally fell from their horses
to the feet of the wonderful being who had risen from the heart of the
earth--the promised goddess who would lead them against the
oppressors.  In the poor, disheveled person of Pauline, coming from her
prison cave, they saw their great White Queen.





CHAPTER XV

THE DEATH STONE

As the thrilled and frightened Indian lay prostrate at her feet, he
might well have believed her to be some creature from another world.

Her face was very pale and round it fell in tumultuous glory the
cascades of her golden hair.  Her dress was torn to shreds by the
jagged rocks and there was blood upon the delicate hands that she held
out in pleading to the only living thing she saw-the red man.

He did not move.  She stepped nearer and, stooping, gently touched his
shoulder.  At the touch he trembled like a leaf, but raised his head
and looked at her with terror and awe and adoration in his eyes.

"Won't you help me?  I have ben a prisoner in the cave.  I must find
Mr. Haines--Haines, do you hear?  Or go to Rockvale--Rockvale," she
repeated, hoping that the names at least he might understand.

He motioned questioningly toward his horse, and, at her nod, he sprang
up and brought the animal to her side.  Helping her to mount, he took
the bridle and began to lead the way into the thickly wooded hills.

The journey was slow and arduous, but it was not long.  Darkness had
not yet fallen when the hill trail dipped into a valley, and Pauline's
weary, hopeful eyes looked down upon a village on the plain.

The hope vanished quickly as she realized that the houses of the
village were teepees and that the people that moved among them were
braves and squaws.

An Indian boy of perhaps twelve years sprang suddenly from a thicket
beside the trail, gave one glance at her, and, with a shriek, set off
at full speed toward the teepees.

Cries sounded and resounded from the hills.  Tom-toms were beating.
She became aware that the Indians were swarming about her and
acclaiming her a guest of unusual honor.  They stopped her horse at the
entrance to Red Snake's teepee.  The great chief stepped forth himself,
with Big Smoke, the medicine man, close behind him.

The prophet, who had foretold the coming of the Great White Queen, wore
a mien of pride and triumph, even as he bowed low before Pauline.  But
of all the red folk in Shi-wah-ki village, Big Smoke was undoubtedly
the most amazed at the fulfillment of his prophecy.

The braves who were assigned to lift Pauline from her horse and bear
her into the Chief's teepee were surprised that one immortal should be
so weak as almost to fall into their arms, so weary as to be scarcely
able to walk.  But Pauline, seated upon a high pile of furs within the
teepee, where the weird light of a fire fell upon her pallid features
and her flowing hair, presented a picture strange and marvelous.

They gathered around her, Red Snake and the medicine man in the center
of the adobe, the lesser chiefs behind them, and in another circle the
ranks of the braves.

Even in her utter exhaustion, the savage solemnity of the gathering
fascinated Pauline.  Had she been left alone she would have fallen
asleep upon the piled furs; but this low muttering, grim-visaged
assemblage of the red men forced her to respectful attention.  That
they honored her, she understood; but she saw, too, that the Indians
were all armed and some of them were painted.  As Red Snake arose to
address the tribe a menacing murmur filled the teepee and the young
chiefs whetted their knives upon the ground.

Red Snake's harangue, unintelligible to Pauline, had an electrical
effect upon the Indians.  Frequently as he spoke he turned toward her
and always when he did so he bent his head upon his breast and raised
his mighty arms in token of submission to a power mightier than his
own.

As he finished, Pauline arose, swaying a little from her great
weakness.  She shook her head in token that she did not understand.
Her outstretched, pleading hands bewildered, but subdued the warlike
assembly.

Red Snake called a ringing summons, and from the rear circle of the
audience shuffled forward the strangest man Pauline had ever seen.  His
undersized, stooping form was garbed in a miner's cast-off red shirt, a
ranchman's ex-trousers, a pair of tattered moccasins and a much-dented
derby hat, with a lone feather in the band of it.  It was White Man's
Hat, a half-breed interpreter.

As he approached, cringing and bowing, Pauline noted that a
penetrating, not unkindly eye gleamed from under his bushy brow,
scrutinizing her in flashes between his obeisances.  Unlike the other
Indians, he was not afraid to look the Great White Queen in the face,
as he solemnly repeated the last words of Red Snake:

"According to the prophecy, you have come from the heart of the world
to lead us against those who steal our land."

Pauline stood for a moment in complete bewilderment.  Then, as the
meaning of the words, with the meaning of the strange gathering,
flashed upon her mind, she took a step forward, speaking in earnest
protest.

But she spoke only to the Chief, for the Indians had broken all
restraint and were crushing their way out of the teepee, with cries and
brandishing of weapons.  They swept the little interpreter with them.
And Red Snake saw in Pauline's look and tone of appeal only the
pleading of a wronged goddess for vengeance upon her enemies.  He
called the women of his household, who shyly led the Queen away.

Darkness had fallen as the women glided ahead of her to a spot outside
the main village, where a spacious teepee had been erected apart.  Only
a peaceful moon and a firmament glittering with stars lighted their
path.  But from the town behind came terrifying yells, the rattle of
tom-toms and occasionally a rifle shot as the braves prepared their
spirits for the test of battle.  Pauline found her new home filled with
all the luxuries and sacred relics of the tribe.  There were rugs
richer than those in the Chief's house; the walls were festooned with
strung beads, and on the large, low couch of bear skins lay the most
splendid of Indian raiment.

The women, with better understanding than men of the earthly needs of
immortals, made her lie down, while they bathed her aching temples and
wounded hands, replaced her torn garments with a gorgeous blanket robe
and smoothed her flying tresses into long comfortable braids.  Other
women came bringing food.  And there was a pipe and a pouch of agency
tobacco with which the goddess might soothe the hours before repose.

Pauline ate eagerly while the women looked oil in silent approval.
When she had finished, she arose smiling and signed to them that she
would rest.  They left softly, and neither the exciting recollections
of the day's adventures nor the tumult of the braves outside could hold
her for a moment longer from the blessedness of sleep.

She slept far into the next morning.  But so did the village, for the
Indians had reveled to exhaustion.  It was nearly noon before she
attired herself in a fringed and beaded dress of buckskin, with
leggings and exquisite little moccasins and laughingly permitted one of
the women attendants to place a painted war feather in her hair.  Thus
clad and with her wide braids falling, she sat regally to receive the
morning call of Red Snake.  She was beginning to take a tremulous
pleasure in the game of being an immortal.  Pauline's questing spirit
was too happy in adventure not to find a thrill in being thus
translated from hungering captive to reigning queen, from queen to
angel.

Red Snake's call was formal and politely brief.  He brought with him
the amusing interpreter to inquire if the Spirit had found comfort in
the hospitality of his people, and more particularly if the war dance
of the preceding night had given her satisfaction.

Pauline replied, with gracious solemnity, that her Spirit had found
good repose and had been comforted by the pleasant music.

"And when will the White Queen lead us against our enemies--the men
of her own color, but not of her kind?" inquired the Chief with
child-like eagerness.

Pauline hesitated an instant after the interpreter repeated the
question.  Then, recovering herself, she answered gravely:

"Today, Red Snake, the Queen rests from her long journey out of the
Happy Hunting Ground.  Tomorrow also.  Upon the next day, perhaps, she
will lead the warriors."

The little interpreter's keen eyes flashed understandingly as he left
out the word "perhaps" in repeating her answer.

Red Snake was elated.  He made profound salutations, promised that the
war party would do her honor, and hastened away to announce the news.

The interpreter lingered, pretending to smooth the door rug.  He looked
up suddenly and his eyes met Pauline's with an expression of friendly
interest.  Instinctively she accepted the tacitly offered friendship.

"You are a white man--you speak English," she said.

"Part white--part red.  You speak all white," he added
significantly.

"Of course," she whispered, stepping to his side.  "I am not a Queen--
not a Spirit.  I do not know why they believe I am.  But I must get
away--to Rockvale, to Mr. Haines's ranch, to the white people
anywhere.  You will help me?"

He looked at her pityingly now.  He had believed that she was an
accomplice of the medicine man in a shrewd fraud, and he had merely
wanted to share the joke, risky as it was.  To find her an accidental
and unwilling monarch struck him dumb.

"That is very hard," he said slowly.  "Look!"

He parted the folds of the teepee door curtain so that she looked out
toward the village.  Three women sat next the door and beyond were
groups of braves, still in their war paint, some conversing, some
stalwart and still.  They seemed to be doing nothing in particular.

"Well?" questioned Pauline.

He led her across the teepee to a narrow slit in the rear curtain.
Through this she peered as she had peered through the door and saw
exactly what she had seen though the door--women crouching at their
tasks in the near foreground, an armed circle of warriors beyond.
Now she understood.

"I am a prisoner then?"

"They will guard you night and day."

"Why?"

"It was prophesied that a Great White Queen would come to lead them to
battle.  You have come, as the prophet said, and you have promised to
lead them to battle.  Above all, be proud, and not afraid."

The ioterpreter hesitated a moment.

"There was another White Queen whose coming was prophesied many
hundreds of years ago," he said.  "She came.  She led the Indians
victory over other Indians and then she vanished in the strangest way.
I would tell you of it--but I am afraid.  They say her spirit is
always near.  Some day you may know how she vanished."

Before she could speak again, he had glided out of the teepee.

While Pauline was away Harry had planned to accomplish mighty labors.
With masculine fatuity he let himself believe--before she went away
--that a man can get more work done with his goddess afar than when
Cupid has a desk in his office.

It did not take more than thirty-six hours to turn separation into
bereavement; not more than forty-eight to turn his "freedom for work"
into slavery to the fidgets.  The office, instead of a refuge, became
a prison to him.  However, he made a pretense of sticking to the grind,
and it was not until the Thursday on which his chartings showed Pauline
would arrive at Rockvale that he actually quit and went home.

He slipped into the library to be alone.  It was more restful here.  As
he sat in the great leather chair and unfolded a newspaper, the
portrait of Pauline smiled brightly down at him in seeming
camaraderie.  At his side stood the Mummy so intimately associated with
her and his dead father's strange vision from the tomb.

Harry began to read, but he was still nervous to the point of
excitement, and his thoughts wandered from the words.  He was suddenly
conscious of another presence in the room.  He let the paper fall and
gazed intently at the portrait.

But a moment later, Harry Marvin sprang excitedly from the chair and
fairly leaped towards the picture.  From somewhere out of the dim air
of the library a hand had reached and touched his.  It had touched his
shoulder and then, with a commanding finger, had pointed upward at the
picture on the wall.

"The Mummy!  It has warned again," gasped Harry.  "Polly, Polly!" he
cried to the portrait, "I'm coming.  Just hold on."

He strode bark to the table and pressed a bell.

"Tell Reynolds to pack me up, Bemis," he charged the astonished
butler.  "Tell him it's for Montana in a rush.  Have a machine ready
for me in fifteen minutes."

Even Bemis's constitutional aversion to haste was overridden.  He sped
into the hall, calling to the valet, as Harry picked up a telephone.

"Hello, this is H. B. Marvin.  I want our private car attached to the
Chicago flyer," he said.  "No matter if it holds up the flyer, I'll
have President Grigsby's authorization in your hands in five minutes.
Thank you.  Goodbye."

As he reached the door of the machine, a messenger boy turned up the
steps.  Harry called to him, took the telegram and read Mrs. Haines'
message: "Pauline kidnapped; come at once."

With a muffled ejaculation, he dropped the slip of paper and sprang
into the car, which in ten minutes pulled up to the station just as the
disgruntled, but curious trainmen were coupling the luxurious Marvinia
to the eighteen-hour express.

Owen coming quietly down the steps of the Marvin house, picked up the
telegram which Harry had let fall.  Reading it, he smiled, and he was
still smiling when another messenger boy followed him to the door.
Owen took the second message and the smile broadened into an ugly grin
as he read:

"Raymond Owen Fifth avenue, New York.  All's well.
                Hicks."

Five days after the disappearance of Pauline, the express stopped again
at Rockvale station.  As Harry swung from the rear step to the dingy
platform, there were many curious eyes to observe his arrival, but the
watchers were mostly women and children.  The men of Rockvale were
still out on the long hunt for Pauline.

Harry hurried first to the station telephone.  Sikes had got Mrs.
Haines on the wire as soon as the smoke of the express had been sighted
ten miles away.  But all she could tell Harry was that there was
nothing to tell.  His lips were set in a hard line as he hung up the
receiver.  He asked a few hasty questions of Sikes, hurried across to
the little hotel, paid for a room and hired a horse.  Blankets and
provisions strapped behind, he was out and away up the road to the
mountains within an hour.

And while he urged his sturdy little mount to better speed on his
uncharted journey, Pauline, not twenty miles away, was preparing for
the last journey she might ever make.

The blow had fallen.  Her royal place, her immortal power had
vanished.

The Indians had permitted one postponement of the day of battle.  She
had said that the Spirits had spoken to her and warned against
bloodshed upon that day.  It should be the second day thereafter the
Spirits had said.  The Indians were disappointed, but they bowed to the
edict.

The morrow passed quietly, but on the next day--the fifth of her
royal captivity--she was summoned from her house by the assembled
chiefs in battle paint and feathers.  She tried to whisper through the
doorway that the Spirits had forbidden again, but Red Snake answered:

"You are greater than all other Spirits; you will lead us today!"

"Tell them," said Pauline to the interpreter, "that the White Queen
does not lead today!"

Red Snake, his face black with anger, after haranguing the chiefs,
turned to Pauline:

"Daughter of the Earth--twice our warriors have been ready for battle
and you would not lead them.  Today you must go before the Oracle and
prove your immortality.  The Oracle will tell."

The warriors departed; only the little interpreter remained.

"What does it mean?" cried Pauline.

"It is the race with the Great Death Stone," he answered, and his own
voice trembled.  "But," he whispered, "I will ride.  I will try to find
help.  Wait."

He slipped under the back of the teepee.  Unseen by the excited
Indians, he made his way to the line of ponies, with lariats and rifles
swung from their saddles.  He picked one and, mounting, rode slowly out
of the village, speaking here and there to the braves he met.

Pauline, left alone, fell upon her knees and prayed.

Harry met Haines and two of his posse on the road to the mountains.

They were on their way back to a general rendezvous ordered by the
Sheriff, but Harry continued on his way up the mountain.

Mile after mile the little mustang put behind him while the sun was
still high.  On the slope of a hill they came to a crossroads, and
Harry, riding almost blindly, reined to the right.

The pony swerved wildly to the left.

Instinctively Harry gave the frightened horse its head.

A half mile farther on the animal stopped and sniffed the wind.  At the
same instant Harry heard a feeble shout from the road.  A weirdly
garbed little half breed lay on the ground holding the bridle of the
horse that had thrown him.

"Ankle gone," he explained.  "Riding for help, I help was.  You ride
now.  White girl--they're killing her up there now."

"White girl?  Where?  Talk fast, man."

"Two miles over the mountain and down to the valley straight ahead.
You go to the bottom of the valley, not to the top--not where the
Indians are.  Climb tree; take my rope; it's the only chance now."

Harry caught the coiled lariat from the other's saddle and rode as he
had never ridden before.  All was vague in his mind, except that
Pauline was near, was in peril, and he must reach her.

How, by road and trail, he ever reached the Valley of the Death Stone
Harry never knew.  Perhaps chance, perhaps some invisible courier
guided him to the lonely spot.  After long, hard riding he was
attracted by the low rumble of many voices lifted in a sort of chant.
Following the voices, he came to the foot of a steep cliff side where a
long trench, partly of natural formation, partly hewn from the stone,
made a chute or runway from mountain top to valley.

At the upper end of the runway a motley band of Indians were engaged in
some weird worship.  Harry started his horse up the steep in the
shelter of the woods.  When he came to a spot where a huge tree limb
crossed the runway, he remembered the little half breed's words, "Climb
the tree; it is the only chance."

Almost at the same instant  from the midst of the Indian group emerged
two giant braves carrying a white woman between them.  They placed her
in the runway.  Her golden hair, unbound, floated on the wind.

Harry choked back a cry, threw aside his rifle, caught the lariat, and,
swinging up the tree, crawled swiftly out on the overhanging limb.
Concealed by the foliage he waited.

A rifle cracked, and, for the first time, he saw that at the top of the
runway, behind Pauline, the stood a mighty boulder, almost perfectly
round, the diameter of which--about five feet--fitted the trench so
well that it could roll in it like a ball in a bowling gutter.

None even among the Indians knew how many times the Stone of Death had
rolled and been dragged back again to the top of the cliff.  The stains
upon it were unnumbered.  Up on its surface was written in blood the
doom of the false prophets and pretending immortals.  None had ever won
in the race with the Death Stone.

The crack of the rifle was the signal for a group of red men to press
behind the stone to free it on its fearful course.  It was also the
signal for Pauline to run.  Her hair streamed wildly in the wind as she
sped, like a frightened deer, down the deadly path.

The rifle sounded again and the Indians heaved the stone into the
trench.

It rumbled as it came on.  It gained upon the fleeing girl.  They had
planned to prolong the torture by giving her a hopeless lead.

Dancing, gesticulating, shouting, the Indians watched the race.  Only
one watcher was silent and motionless.  Hidden by the leaves he braced
himself upon the tree limb.  For the first moments after the rock was
released he had turned sick and dizzy.  Now, as they came near--the
thing relentless but inanimate pursuing the thing helpless, beautiful
and most precious to him of all things in the world, not the quiver of
a muscle hindered the desperate task that he had set himself.

A moment later he was sobbing like a child as he half dragged, half
carried Pauline to his waiting horse.  By the magic of luck, by the
mystery of a protecting Fate, the lariat noose had fallen about her
shoulders.  To the amazed and terrified Indians up the cliff she had
soared suddenly, spirit-like, out of the trench and vanished in the
foliage of the tree, while the boulder thundered on, cheated of its
prey.

But swiftly out of the woods upon the open plain below appeared a rider
with a woman clasped before him on the saddle.

The baffled Indians scurried for their horses.  They reached the
valley.  They gained upon the burdened horseman and his tired horse.
They fired as they rode, the bullets spitting venomously in the dust
around Harry and Pauline.

The pony stumbled.  Harry jerked it up and it struggled bravely on, but
the cries behind sounded louder.

The bullets hit nearer.

Suddenly the firing increased.  There were more cries.  And Harry,
reining the pony saw, galloping over the ridge to the westward, the
full posse of Hal Haines.  They fired as they came.  They cut between
him and the Indians.  He stopped the pony and lifted Pauline to the
ground.

"My precious one, God bless you and forgive us all," sobbed Mrs. Haines
as Polly was caught in her mothering embrace.  "And you--you had to
come all the way from New York to save her," she added, turning to
Harry.

"Don't say anything about it, Mrs. Haines," he said in a stage
whisper.  "I came out here to rest and avoid publicity."






CHAPTER XVI

SOPHIE MCALLAN'S WEDDING

A few days after their return from Montana Pauline sat reading by the
library window.  They had come late to the country this Summer and the
park of Castle Marvin had had time to leave and bloom into utter
splendor.  It was like a flowery kingdom in the Land of Faery, and as
her eyes were lifted listlessly now and then from the printed page,
they roamed over the garden which lay like some vast and radiant
Oriental rug in Nature's palace hall.  The distant forest was the
palace wall, tapestried in green; its dome, a sky of tender blue; its
lamp, the morning sun; its Prince, her Harry standing in the garden.

"He should always stand in the garden," thought Pauline tenderly.  "The
flowers are such a splendid foil for him."

She shut her eyes in sheer satiety of beauty.  Not even the shabby man
mopping his hot forehead as he came along the road, marred the
picture.  She was a little surprised to see him, a moment later,
talking in an easy way with Harry but there was no false pride in her
lover--brother and all men were his friends until they proved
themselves his enemies.  All except Owen.

The shabby man, holding his hat between his nervous hands, was
evidently an applicant for work.  Harry pointed to the flower beds and
the rose trees with a nod of inquiry.  The man assented vaguely.  And
they came on up the path together, making their way towards the
servants' quarters over the garage.  Harry paused at the window:

"I have hired a new gardener, who does not know his own name," he said
as they passed on.

Pauline turned back to the pages of the Cosmopolitan.  A picture in an
article on the motor races caught her eye and held it for some reason
that she did not at first understand.  It was a picture of a man in
auto-racer's costume, with a helmet tight upon his head and the keen
features and daring eyes peculiar to those who live by peril.  She had
started to read the caption when she was interrupted by Bemis bringing
her letters.  With a little flutter of pleasure, womanlike, she began
to read the letters from their postmarks before opening them.  She hit
upon one that brought a little peal of laughter from her, and she
opened it eagerly and read:

"Walter and I want you and Harry to be with us at the wedding.  Don't
faint.  We decided only yesterday, and it's going to be very quiet,
with just the few people whom we can reach with informal notes like
this.  You can motor over in an hour.  Tell Harry our lions arrived
last Thursday from Germany, and after the wedding the keeper will
exhibit them.  If Harry won't come to see me married, he'll come to see
the lions.

"Yours in a flurry, Sophie McAllan."

Pauline laughed again.  It was like her unconventional chum, Sophie, to
arrange her wedding with the same startling haste that had marked all
the breathless events of her life.  The lions she mentioned were
typical of her original ideas.  She had suddenly announced to her
parents one day that she was tired of domestic animals and was going to
keep lions instead.  And her amused and amazed father had not only been
forced to yield, but to keep his eye out all over Europe, Asia and
Africa for new bargains in well bred lions ever since.

It was also typical of Sophie that she had selected from among all the
dashing wooers; at her heels, Walter Trumwell, simple and sedate, who
was horrified by her pranks and shocked by her use of slang, but who
adored her with the devotion of a frightened puppy.  Their engagement
had been long announced.  It was only in its high-handed abruptness
that the wedding was a surprise.

Pauline dropped the letter on the table and hurried from the room to
look for Harry.

He had head her first call and was coming in from the garage.  Pausing
at the door of the library, where he had last seen her, he narrowly
avoided a collision with Owen, who was hurrying out.  The look of
covert guilt on the secretary's face aroused his latent suspicion.  But
Owen, quickly recovering himself, bowed, apologized and passed on.

Harry stepped into the library.  He saw the open letter on the table,
looked at the envelope and saw that, he was included in the address.
He read the letter, and the old look of trouble came into his eyes as
he turned to see if Owen were watching.

As he stepped into the hall he saw the secretary leaving the house.  He
stood in the doorway and watched Owen depart in his own machine, driven
by his own chauffeur, a sullen young fellow whom the other employees
held in aversion.

"He's up to something.  I wonder what harm he could do at the McCallan
wedding," muttered Harry, as he moved down the steps and out to where
the new gardener was working.  The man had been greatly improved as to
cleanliness and clothes, but there was still the strange distant look
in his eyes as he got up from a flower bed to speak to Harry.

Pauline, after circling the house in vain search of her brother, had
returned to her unread letters and her magazine.

As she lifted the latter from the table, the picture of the man in
racing costume again struck her eye, and this time she read the
caption:

"Ralph Palmer, whose skull was fractured in the Vanderbilt Cup Race and
who disappeared from a hospital six weeks ago."

She studied the face again.  It seemed the living likeness of one whom
she had seen dead.  Suddenly her thoughts crystallized and she sprang
up.  She rushed again to the front door, carrying the magazine open and
saw Harry and the gardener talking on the path.  She ran down to them.

The gardener took off his hat, but Pauline looked at him with such
piercing scrutiny that he hurried to resume his work.  Harry, after a
brief affectionate greeting, turned to give some last instructions,
and, behind his back, Pauline stole another look at the magazine.

"It is; I am sure it is," she said half aloud.

Harry turned quickly.  "What is, dear goddess of the garden?" he asked
cheerily.

Pauline closed the magazine abruptly.

"Oh!  I--I was dreaming," she answered, with a little nervous laugh.

"You can't have a dream when you are one," he said, putting his arm
about her waist as they moved back towards the house.

"I have news," she exclaimed, remembering the wedding invitation.
"Sophie McCallan is to be married tonight--just like that--without
telling till the last minute."

"I read the letter in the library."

"Did you tell Farrell to have the car ready?"

"I will, dearest.  But I am not sure that I can go."

"But you must go."

"I got a telegram this morning, and I must go into town."

"To New York!  Oh, Hairy, I simply hate your old business.  Haven't we
got enough money without trying to make all there is in the world?
Aren't we..."

"No, not to New York--just into Westbury, Miss Firebrand.  I must use
the wire direct to the office."

"Absurd.  Why don't you telephone your message?"

"Code messages, dear.  They can't be talked."

"But you'll be back in time to go with me?"

"I'll do my best.  I'm starting directly.  There's Farrell with the
machine now."

"But Farrell must get my car ready."

"He will.  Farrell isn't going with me."

Her threats and pretty pleadings followed him as he drove away.  But
Harry did not drive towards Westbury farther than the first
crossroads.  Instead, he swerved out across country towards Windywild,
the great McCallan estate.  Only a vague purpose moved him.  His
suspicions were groping.  But he was forming dimly in his mind a plan
to keep Pauline away from the McCallan wedding.  Premonition whispered
that even among the nuptial gayeties there might be danger.

On the crest of Winton's Hill, from which the road slopes down to
beautiful Windywild through parked forests, but from which the rambling
white villa, with its barns and garage can be seen in striking
bird's-eye view, Harry stopped his machine.

To his far vision there was no unusual stir about the McCallan house,
in spite of the wedding day.  Owen's car was not at the gate nor in the
yard, and he certainly would not have sent it to the garage if he were
making a business visit to the manager of the estate.

With a hateful sense of spying on the innocent and the sincere dread of
being met there by anyone--even by Owen--he was about to turn
around, go back and agree to take Pauline to the wedding, when the
movement of a figure through the distant garage yard made him stiffen
to attention and strain his gaze.

In an instant he had whipped his binoculars from under the seat of the
runabout and was staring through them at the establishment below.  A
few moments afterwards he carefully replaced the glasses, and drove
away.

Owen had left the Marvin place in haste, seemingly intent upon a direct
and important errand, but if any one had seen where the car stopped an
hour later, both the haste and the errand would still have been
unexplained.

They were in the loneliest stretch of woods a half mile beyond the
McCallan house when Owen leaned forward and said to his driver: "You
may stop here."

"Yes, sir," answered the young man with a respect that he showed to no
one else.  He drew the machine to the roadside and then asked: "Am I to
go with you or stay here?"

"Stay here," answered Owen.  "But don't sit there lolling in the seat.
We have broken down--you understand--and you will keep us broken
down and keep on mending the machine until I return."

Owen, who was not averse to physical effort when his dearest object was
at stake, walked the half mile to Windywild rapidly.  Unlike Harry's,
Owen's plans were definite and fixed.

He strode through the front gate but took his way immediately to the
stable in front of which two grooms were currying a restless horse.

"Hello, Simon," said Owen.  "My car has broken down up the road here. I
wonder if you can help me out."

"I guess so," said the groom, not very cheerfully.

"We got plenty to do today as it is, Mr. Owen, with the weddin' party
on an' them gol blamed lions to look after."

"Who talka da lions?" cried a grim voice, and, turning, Owen pretended
to see for the first time a short, heavy set man of the gypsy type,
seated on a box at the stable door smoking a cigarette and evidently
regarding all the world as the object of his personal hate.

"Why, who is that man?" asked Owen of the groom in a tone of
condescending interest.  "Where have I seen him before?"

"If ye ever saw him before, ye wouldn't want to see him again,"
declared the groom.  "He's Garcia, Miss Sophie's new lion tamer, but we
ain't had time to tame him yet.  He's wild."

The answer to this taunt was a rush from Garcia, who, uttering an
unintelligible roar that might have done credit to one of his lions,
sprang towards the groom.  The latter took quick refuge behind the
horse.

The man's fury made Owen step aside, too, but he looked on with an
appreciative smile.  As Garcia came back, growling, to his seat on the
box, the secretary stepped up to him and held out his hand.

"Is it really you?" he said, the patronage in his voice offsetting the
familiarity of his manner.

"If it looks like me, it is me," snarled the Gypsy.  "Him--over
there," he cried, pointing to the groom, "he donta looka like his own
face if I get him."

"Come, old friend," said Owen in a low voice.  "Don't you remember me?
Don't you remember the Zoological Garden in Brussels and the lion that
bent a cage so easily one day that it killed Herr Bruner, of Berlin."

The last words spoken almost in a whisper, had an electrical effect
upon the lion tamer.  He fairly writhed in his seat and cowered away
from Owen as from one who held a knife over his head.

It was at this moment that Harry, looking from the hill, put away his
binoculars and turned his car around.

"Come, let's see the lions, may I?" asked Owen, cheerily ignoring the
man's terror, secretly enjoying it.

Without a word Garcia led the way into the stables.

The lions, six in number, were quartered in box stalls rebuilt with
heavy steel bars.  They had been quiet, but the sight of a stranger set
them wild and their roaring thundered through the building.

Garcia led Owen to farthest cage and stopped abruptly.

"You after me?" he inquired, his nerve partially recovered.

"Yes, but to help you, not to harm you, old friend."

"You lie, I theenk.  You tella the police of the leetle accident in
Bresseli--no?"

"No, indeed; you are too useful a man to lose, Garcia.  Besides, I need
you again."

The gypsy held up his hands in refusal.  "No," he whispered.  "I hava
one dead man's face here always."  He pointed to his eyes.  "I cry it
away; I go all over da world.  I not forget.  He not forget.  He folla
me."

Owen laughed.  "Come, come," he said, "you are foolish.  You had
nothing to do with that affair, except to loosen one little bar ever so
little.  (Garcia groaned.)  And it would be just as easy to leave say a
cage door open tonight while they're having the wedding."

"You mean--?"

"I mean only a little joke.  Nobody will be hurt, I feel sure.  Of
course, if any one should be, you could not be blamed.  Come, I want a
quick answer.  If you won't do it, of course--you don't want anything
said about Brussels, do you, old friend?"

The man uttered another cry.

Owen drew money from his pocket.  The man seized it greedily.  If he
was to do the blackest of deeds, there was nothing in his conscience to
prevent him from profiting.

"Tonight--during the wedding, remember," said Owen.  "I will give you
the signal.  And, mind, you brute, if you don't do it, you know what
I'll do to you."

A few moments later he was out chatting cheerily with the grooms.  "I'm
not going to ask you to help me with the car, Simon," he said.  "You're
too crowded today, I see.  I'll send Farrell up to the Hodgins House
and wait for him.  Good-day."

He swung off down the road, greatly at peace with all the world.  He
did not even rebuke his chauffeur when he caught him loafing on the
grass.

Harry and the household chauffeur, Farrell, were talking together
outside the garage and Harry was handing a $10 bill to Farrell, who
grinned broadly as he pocketed it.  Owen saw nothing in this to cause
him apprehension.  Harry was always generous with the employees.  It
was well for Owen's plan that he should go to the wedding in so
pleasant a mood.

Pauline looked up from her book as Harry entered the library.

"I'm so happy," she cried.  "You are a darling boy to come home so
soon."

He accepted her rewarding kiss gratefully.

"Yes, I think it's all right," he said, "though there are some serious
matters in hand at the office."

The butler appeared at the door.  "Farrell asks if he may have a word
with you, Sir."

"Farrell?  Why, yes; let him come here."

The chauffeur, cap in hand, stepped into the room.

"Guess I got to take the big car to New York, Sir.  I haven't got the
parts to fix it, and I can't get them nowhere but in New York."

"Very well; that's all right, Farrell."

"But be back surely by four o'clock, Farrell," warned Pauline.  "You
are the only driver I have."

"Oh, I'll get back all right, Miss."

But immediately after uttering these words in a tone of perfect
respect, Farrell committed an astonishing offense against the laws that
separate servitor and employer.  He caught the shimmer of a wink upon
Harry's eye, and he had the audacity to return it.

Three minutes afterwards Farrell did a stranger thing.  Going direct
from the house to the telephone in the garage, he took up the receiver
and called up the house.  Owen, passing by, stopped spellbound, at the
door, to hear these mandatory words spoken by the chauffeur to Harry
Marvin, whose answering voice could actually be heard by Owen through
the open window of the library.

"Mr. Marvin, you are needed at your office.  Come at once," phoned
Farrell.

He was grinning again as he came out of the garage, got into a machine
and drove away.  Owen gazed after him with puzzled, lowering brows.





CHAPTER XVII

PALMER COMES BACK

Harry had just hung up the receiver of the telephone and had turned to
Pauline with feigned disappointment.

"My office is calling me," he said.  "I'm needed there at once.  I
shan't be able to go to the wedding."

The sight of the happiness fading from her flowerlike face filled him
with shame.  It was the first time in his life that he had lied to her
and he was half sorry now that he had done so.  But he must go through
with it now, and if there was apology in the kisses he pressed on her
reproachful eyes it was not confessed.

"I am going to the wedding just the same," declared Pauline.

"Of course, you are," he agreed heartily.  "Farrell will be back with
the car by five o'clock."

"But who will chaperon me?" she objected, woman-like, to her own
decision.  "It would look absurd to take Margaret, and Owen isn't
invited."

"You will not need a chaperon going over--provided Farrell gets
back," he said as he took his hat from the table.

"You mean you don't believe Farrell will get back!" she exclaimed.
"You are treating me like a child.  You don't want me to go to the
wedding just because you can't go."

"Now, don't, don't," he pleaded, as she started to leave the room.  "I
don't mean anything of the kind.  I mean Farrell is the only man who
can drive the large car or the roadster safely.  There is no reason in
the world why he shouldn't get back."

"And how am I to come home?" she demanded, turning again toward him.

"I will call for you in the runabout on my way from New York.  Perhaps
even I shall be able to arrive in time to greet the happy pair," he
added cheerfully.  "You'll make my excuses."

Owen, who was listening at the door, had just time, to glide away
before Harry hurried out.

The young master of the house had driven far toward the station before
the secretary returned to the library.

This time he entered and pretended to be hunting for a magazine.
Pauline's disconsolate face gave him the excuse he desired.

"Why, Miss Marvin, has anything happened?" he asked in a tone of
concern.

"Oh, everything has gone wrong," she cried, almost in tears.

"What do you mean?"

"Harry is called to the city just when we are invited to Sophie
McCallan's wedding, and Farrell has taken the limousine for some silly
repairs.  They'll not get back; I know they'll not.  They never do."

"But, Miss Marvin?"

"Oh, don't try to apologize for him.  He cares more for his old
business than he does for me.  He makes automobiles himself, and yet I
can't have enough for my own personal use.  I'm sorry I forgave him,"
she flared.

"You are right, Miss Marvin; it is an outrage."

She looked at Owen in astonishment.  It was the first time she had ever
heard him venture a critical word against Harry.

"I think it is your fault," she declared.  "You are the one who should
see that I have cars and drivers--everything I want."

"But you know the machines have not come from the town house, Miss
Marvin.  They will be here tomorrow."

"Well, Owen, it isn't for you to say that what my brother does is an
outrage.  He does everything for the best."

"Miss Marvin, Harry is lying to you," he said quietly.  "He and your
chauffeur have formed a plot against you.  Your car will not be back
this afternoon at all."

She sprang to her feet, furious.

"Owen, be still!  How do you dare to say such things?"

Raymond Owen had found his great moment,  His enemy had set his own
trap and Owen would see that he should not escape easily.  The
opportunity to break forever the bond of faith and affection between
Harry and Pauline had come.  His voice rose as he poured out his
revelations and denunciations.

Pauline was leaving the room, when he thrust himself before her.

"You must hear me.  I know what I say is true.  It hurts me as deeply
as it will hurt you, but you must hear it.  I believe I have discovered
--by the merest accident--the cause of all your perils.  The plots
against you have been arranged at home."

"You are mad.  I will not listen to you.  Let me pass."

"Not until you have heard," he declared firmly.

"I was passing the door of the garage only a few moments ago," he went
on in a rapid whisper.  "I saw Farrell at the telephone.  He called the
private house number--the number of this phone on the table.  You and
Mr. Marvin were sitting here.  I was so surprised that I stopped and
listened to Farrell's words.  I could see Mr. Marvin listening at the
phone here.  Farrell said: 'Mr. Marvin, you are needed at your
office.  Come at once.'  Then he hung up the receiver and came out,
laughing.  He got into the limousine and drove off towards the city.
If he could drive the limousine to the city, could he not drive it to
the McCallan's for you?"

Pauline put her hands to her ears with a protesting cry.

"It isn't true," she whispered.  "It is only a scheme of Farrell's to
get an afternoon off."

"It is a scheme of Harry's to keep you from the wedding--for what
purpose only he knows.  It is one of many schemes that have held your
life in constant peril.  I saw their plan arranged.  I saw your brother
hand money to Farrell at the door of the garage and they parted,
laughing."

Pauline's mind whirled.  "I won't believe it!  I can't;  I can't!" she
cried.  Doubt and fear and fury mingled in her breast.  Weeping
tumultuously, she rushed past Owen and up to her own room.

Two hours later, the struggle over, she called Margaret, who bathed her
hot temples and dressed her for the wedding.

Harry Marvin, in town, tried his best to make good use of the time he
had stolen.  But the thought of his well-meant chicanery was heavy on
his mind and it was not unmixed with apprehension.  After all, Pauline
might find a way to go to the wedding.  Might he not, instead of having
averted a danger, simply have absented himself from the scene of danger
when he was most needed?  His nervousness increased.  He found himself
incapable of work, and at three o'clock, to the surprise of his clerks,
who had thought his unexpected visit must mean an important conference
of directors, he called a taxicab and started for Westbury.  But he had
no intention of going to Castle Marvin unless it was necessary.  He
meant to telephone from Westbury and learn whether or not Pauline had
gone to the wedding.  If she had not, he would remain away until late.

A few minutes before four o'clock, Farrell, with his pretty wife whom
he had called to share his plot and his holiday, drove up to a rural
telegraph office.  They were both laughing as Farrell handed this
message to the operator:

Miss Pauline Marvin, Castle Marvin, Westbury.  Blow-out. Can't get back
this evening.  George Farre

"You--don't want to say what kind of a blow-out it is, do you?"
grinned the operator, glancing out of the window at the spic and span
machine.

"If you don't see everything you look at, you'll save your eyesight,"
replied Farrell cheerfully.

At the next town he telephoned to the Marvin office in New York.  He
came out of the booth with a worried look.

"The boss has left in a taxi for home," he said.  "Wonder what that
means.  Guess we better sort of travel along towards Westbury.  He
might need me."

They changed their course and had driven for some time at an easy rate
through the smiling country when the sound of a machine coming up
speedily behind caused Farrell to look around.  The passenger in the
open cab waved his hand and Farrell, saluting, slowed down.  The cars
stopped, side by side.  Harry raised his hat to the young woman.

"You're not going home, are you, Farrell?" he said.

"I heard you'd left the office and I thought something might have
happened, and I'd be near enough so you could get me quick."

"Nothing has happened.  I'll get along nicely with this cab.  You'd
better keep a good distance and not come home until tomorrow morning."

"Very well, sir.  That suits us fine." Farrell grinned.

The taxi started on and Farrell turned off at the next crossroad.

"He's a great boss, but a queer one," he said to his wife.  "It's a
queer family all around.  I wonder what's being cooked up now."

As the time of Farrell's expected return drew near Pauline's despair
and anger increased with every moment.  When four o'clock struck she
arose and walked nervously out to the garage to ask if any word had
been received from Farrell.  She found Owen there.

As she turned toward him, after her futile questioning, Pauline's grief
suddenly mounted to anger.

"It is after four, and Farrell has not returned," she exclaimed.

She had come out to the yard in the exquisite white gown that she was
to wear to the wedding, a flashing jewel at her white throat, her hair
done regally high.  Now, in her anger, she was a picture of fury made
beautiful.

Her outburst was interrupted by a messenger boy with a telegram.  She
opened the message with nervous fingers.

"Blow out.  Can't get back this evening," she read.

She tore the message into pieces, dropped them and, stamped upon them
with her white slippers.

"It's true, it's true!" she cried, turning desperately to Owen.

"I am terribly, hopelessly sorry--but I knew that it was true," he
said solemnly.

At this moment along the drive came the new gardener wheeling a barrow
of fresh mold, his rake and hoe lying across it.  "Palmer!" Pauline
cried.

The man let fall the barrow as if he had been cut with a whip lash.  He
looked up and for an instant his dazed eyes seemed to brighten.  Then
he picked up the barrow as if no one had spoken and went on.

Pauline followed him.

"Bring out the roadster," she called over her shoulder, and, as she
stopped beside the gardener.  The garage men, bewildered, but used to
the kindly vagaries of their pretty employer, sent the machine down
driveway.

"Can you drive an automobile, Palmer?" asked Pauline.

This time the man's eyes did not brighten.  He looked at her
respectfully, but dully.  She drew him to the car and repeated the
question.  He only grinned foolishly and kept on shaking his head.

"Wait," she said, and, running back to the house, reappeared directly
wearing her hat and flowing white wrap.  "Come, Palmer, you must drive
me to the wedding," she declared.

She made him get into the car and take the wheel.  As she got in beside
him, his hands fumbled aimlessly with the lever.

"Palmer!  Palmer!" she dinned his forgotten name into his ears.  "Don't
you remember the race, the road, the flying cars, the speed, the
speed!  Don't you remember the man who was in the lead--the man the
crowd cheered for?  That was you, Palmer, the greatest of all the
drivers."

She leaned forward in the seat, arms outstretched as if holding a
tugging wheel, eyes set straight ahead, slippered feet threading
imaginary levers, graceful body swerving.

He watched her, frowning.  A vague purpose seemed to animate the hand
groping with the levers.

"Wake up, Palmer!  It's time for the race--the Vanderbilt Cup.  Kirby
and Michaels have started.  There's Wharton coming to the line.  Don't
you see the crowds?  Can't you hear them cheering?  Palmer!  Palmer! *
* * Yes, we're coming! * * * Palmer is coming back. * * * Way there!"

He found the self-starter; the engine sounded.  He found the clutch and
gears.  His eyes were shut.  The car started slowly and he opened his
eyes.  Pauline sank back in the seat, laughing and clapping her hands,
half hysterically.

"Bravo, Palmer!" she exulted.

The astonished workmen saw them glide through the outer gate.  Raymond
Owen from his window saw them and rubbed his hands pleasantly.  Fate
indeed seemed to be favoring his deadly work today!

The car swung into the highway.

"Drive faster," commanded Pauline.

The listless hands hardened on the wheel.  She saw him bend over and
fix his vision on the road.  She thrilled at the miracle she had
wrought.

More speed, and the wind blew her cape from her shoulders; the dust
beat in her face.  She merely tightened her veil and sat silent.

"Take the first turn to the right," she called in his ear as they
neared the crossroad.  He did not slacken the speed.

"It's a sharp turn; slow a little," she cautioned.  He did not seem to
hear her.

She placed her hand sharply on his arm.  He drove past the crossroad,
the speed to the last notch.

Pauline tried to stand up in the seat and seize the wheel.  He thrust
her back with one hand, not even looking at her.  He was leaning far
over the wheel now, his eyes blazing.  She could see the beat of blood
in his temple.

"Stop!  Stop!  You are on the wrong road.  You will kill us both!" she
screamed in his deaf ears.  She tried again to wrest the wheel from
him, but this time he held her fast after he had flung her back.  She
had raised up a Frankenstein for her own destruction.  She was being
driven by a madman.

As they took the curve outside Westbury village another car filled with
men and women fairly grazed them.  The women screamed and the men
shouted wildly after them.  But they flashed on.

Down the hill at Gangley's Mills the pace grew even greater.  From the
west prong of the road fork at the bottom a taxicab shot into view.
There was a shout of warning, a rattle and creak as the taxi swerved,
safe by inches.

On the skirts of Clayville a group of farmers and a constable were
arguing a roadside dispute.  Pauline could see dim figures leap into
the road waving arms; she could hear them shouting.  The figures jumped
to either side as Palmer drove through the group.

They sprang back into the road, cursing and shaking their fists, only
to be routed anew by the rush of the taxicab following.

The roadster straightened out on the ledge of Scrogg Hill.  In spite of
the curve and the precipice Palmer held his speed.  His daring, his
utter mastery, stirred a kind of admiration in Pauline and the death
she saw looming stirred anew her courage.  She wrenched her arm free
from his grip.  She stood up and swung her weight against the man,
rasping for the wheel.  The car swerved toward the cliff, but he jerked
it back, striking at her brutally with his free hand.  She fell in the
seat, but returned, desperate, to the encounter.  She caught the
wheel.  She tried to command it, but his strength drew the other way.
The machine shot toward the abyss.  There was a crackle as the wooden
guide fence splintered under the wheels. There was a crash!

Harry, leaning from the taxicab behind, uttered a groan.  The roadster
had gone over the cliff.

Fifty feet down the rock-gnarled hillside they took Pauline from the
clutch of the dead driver.  His fall had broken hers and it was only
from fear that she had fainted.  Harry, pressing the taxi driver's
flask to her lips, saw her eyes open and his cry was like a prayer of
thanksgiving.

When Harry lifted Pauline to carry her to the taxicab, to his abasement
he felt her hands press him away.  He thought she had not yet
recovered, that she believed herself still in the grasp of the madman.
He set her on her feet and looked at her questioningly.

Without a word she turned from him and started up the road.

"Pauline!" he cried.  "What do you mean?  Don't you know me?  It's
Harry."

She kept on without turning.  He caught her by the arm.  "Don't you
know me, your brother?" he pleaded.

She turned, tremblingly.  "You are not my brother," she blazed.  "And I
did not know you until today."

"You are hurt and ill, dearest.  Come, let me take you home."

She walked on up the road.

"But where are you going?" he demanded.

"I am going to the wedding.  You tried to keep me away by your base
trick but you can't do it."

Now he understood.  "I know; I know," he groaned.  "It was the meanest
and most useless thing.  But I did not think it was safe for you to go
to the wedding.  I am sorry to the bottom of my heart."

"Goodbye," she said coldly, walking on.

"But you can't go like that," he exclaimed, pointing to her torn and
draggled clothes, her unfastened hair.

"It is better to go to friends whom I can trust," she said coldly, and
moved on.

As gently as he could he lifted her in his arms and carried her to the
taxicab.  Placing her in the seat he followed, and as the machine
started began to pour out his repentance.  She would not even answer,
but sat with averted face, weeping and trembling.

At last she became quiet.  He drew her tattered wrap closer about her
shoulders and put his arm around her so that her head rested against
his breast.  A moment later, looking down, he was surprised to see that
she was smiling like a tired child.





CHAPTER XVIII

A HOT YOUNG COMET

"That's right; praise her; pet her; make her think she's great, so
she'll do it all over again."

Harry turned away wrathfully from the joyous greetings of Lucille and
Chauncey Hamlin to Pauline.

"Harry is quite right," said Lucille.  "I ought to snub you entirely.
It is disgraceful, it's wicked to be as brave as you are, Polly."

"Oh, I say, Lucy," pleaded her brother.  "You'll have Miss Pauline all
upset."

"She likes it," snapped Harry.  "She's been upset out of everything
from a balloon to a house afire, and now she's looking for new
capsizable craft."

"Polly!  You wouldn't try it again!  You don't want any more thrills
after this?" Lucille's astonishment was sincere.

Pauline cast a serpentine glance at Harry.  "Am I to live quietly at
home with a creature like him?" she inquired.

"Why don't you have me beheaded, O Great White Queen?"

"The braves are reserved for torture.  Where are you people going so
bright and early?" she added turning to Chauncey.

"Going to take you for a little morning spin.  Car's perfectly safe."

"Yes, do come along, Polly," urged Lucille.

"What!  In a safe car?  Never!" exclaimed Harry.  "It isn't done, you
know--not in this family.  Now, if you had a hot restless young comet
hitched at the door, Chauncey."

Pauline laughed merrily.  "No, I couldn't go this morning even behind a
restless young comet."  She glanced mischievously at Harry.  "Duty
before pleasure; have important business on hand.  No, I can't tell
even you, Lucille--you're not to be trusted.  You'd be sure to tell
Harry."

As the Hamlins drove off, Harry turned anxiously.

"You've not forgotten your promise?  There is to be a long rest from
wildness, isn't there--no more adventures?"

"Yes--a rest from wild ones.  I am going to have a tame adventure
now."

"Polly, Polly!  What do you mean?"

"This," she answered, taking the morning paper from the table.
Unfolding it, she showed him a headline:

     GREAT LORDNOR STABLES
           TO BE AUCTIONED

World-Famous Horses of Late Millionaire Sportsman Under Hammer.

"Well?" questioned Harry.

"Don't you see?" she tantalized him.

"Not in the least."

"I am going to buy Firefly and ride him in the steeplechase handicap."

Harry's smile was almost despairing, but he answered quickly.  "Oh, I
see.  You'll have me ride him and break my precious neck. I thought for
a second you meant to ride yourself."

"That's just what I do mean.  It will be gorgeously exciting--and
perfectly safe."

"Safe?"

"Well, of course, I might be killed by a fall or something."

He laughed in spite of himself.  "I shall not permit it," he said.

"You will not permit it?" she beamed.  "Then I'll ask my guardian.  I
may ride Firefly in the steeplechase if I choose, mayn't I, Owen?" she
asked brightly.

Pauline could never bear malice; already she had forgiven Owen, as well
as Harry.

The secretary had just entered and was watching the two with a
questioning eye.

"If we own Firefly, you may," he smiled back at her.

"I told you," she triumphed over Harry.

"But we don't own him," said Owen, puzzled.

"We shall this afternoon.  The Lordnor stables are being sold.  Please
give me a great deal of money so that I can't be outbid."

"Does Miss Pauline really mean this?" asked the secretary.

"She does," Harry answered in a tone of disgust at what he thought now
was only Owen's weakness.  There seemed no chance of a plot against
Pauline in this original scheme of her own.

"She rides wonderfully.  I do not see why she should not," Owen
condescended.

"You don't seem to see much of anything," declared Harry.

"But you'll take me to the auction?" coaxed Pauline.

"I'll have to--or you'll spend the whole estate on a Shetland pony."

Owen sauntered from the room, laughing.  Bareheaded he walked quite
across the garden and down into the wood-copse by the path gate.

A gypsy was leaning upon the gate and gazing nervously up and down the
road.  He turned at the sound of Owen's footsteps, and the eyes of the
young chief, Michel Mario, gazed apprehensively into the smiling eyes
of the secretary.

"How are you, Balthazar?" greeted Owen.

"Don't use that name to me," pleaded the gypsy.  "You have work for
me?  I have come all the way back from Port Vincent to see you."

"It was kind of you," said Owen with the faintest tinge of sarcasm.
"Yes, I have important work for you.  Have you ever doctored a horse,
Balthazar?"

"Many times--but not with my beauty medicine," grinned the chief.

"I mean with a hypodermic needle. I mean a race horse-so that he might
possibly fall in a race."

"And injure the rider?"

"Exactly."

"It is very easy--but very dangerous.  I should want--"

"I know; I know," exclaimed Owen petulantly.  "Here is the money."

Balthazar gloated over the yellow bills.

"And here is the weapon."

The Gypsy took the needle from the hand of the secretary and thrust it
quickly into the inside pocket of his blouse.  "Thank you, master.  I
will do what you say," said the Gypsy, making a move to go.

"Not quite so fast," commanded Owen.  "You do not know the place or the
time."

"The Jericho track next Saturday," answered the Gypsy promptly.  "What
is the horse?"

"Firefly.  It will be bought at the Jericho stables this afternoon.
You will be there to see it and to remember it.  Goodbye now."

"Goodbye master--and many thanks."

Michael Caliban, wealthiest of sportsmen, attended the auction of the
Lordnor stables, and seemed bent on adding the entire string of
splendid horses to his own far-famed monarchs of the track.

The only time during the afternoon that he met with defeat was when the
famous steeplechaser Firefly was brought out.

"Five hundred dollars," said Caliban curtly.

"Six hundred," said the musical voice of a girl and the crowd turned to
look.

Caliban smiled condescendingly.  "A thousand," he said.

"There, you see you can't do it.  The horse isn't worth any more,"
cautioned Harry.

"Fifteen hundred dollars," cried Pauline.

"Does she mean that, or is this only a joke?" demanded Caliban, turning
to the auctioneer.

"The lady's word is good enough for me.  Going at fifteen hundred--
going, going--"

"Two thousand dollars.  I guess that'll stop any jokes around here,"
grinned Caliban.

"Three thousand," said Pauline so quickly that even Harry gasped, cut
short in mid-protest.

Caliban turned away and strode disgustedly out of the crowd amid hoots
of laughter.

"He is worth it; why he is worth any price," cried Pauline as the
smiling groom led Firefly up to her.

The magnificent animal thrust its nose instantly between her
outstretched arms, and as she patted him delightedly the crowd rippled
with spontaneous applause.

Harry joined her on the way to see Firefly put in his stall.  He gave
the caretaker instructions, and laughingly dragged Pauline away from
her new pet.

As they entered their machine, Raymond Owen came from behind the
stable.

Engrossed in the business complications growing out of the European
conflict, Harry had quite forgotten Firefly and the steeplechase when
the day of the great Jericho handicap arrived.

He was in the library reading a letter when there burst upon his sight
through the open doorway a vision that took his breath away.

Pauline, in full jockey uniform, white and blue and yellow, was
pirouetting on her gleaming black boots before him.

"Polly!" he cried, unable to grasp the meaning of the prank.  "Have you
cut off your hair?" he added in alarm.

"No; here it is," she laughed, snapping off her visored cap and
revealing masses of hair.

"Oh, don't do it," he begged.  "Look!  Here's a letter from the
McCallans asking us to their house party in the Adirondacks.  We're
expected tomorrow.  Let's go there instead."

He handed her the letter.  Without glancing at it she flicked it into
the air with her riding crop and danced out of her room..

"So I surrender again," he murmured, laughing in spite of himself.

Riding out toward the starting line, Pauline swerved her course a
little to avoid the gaze of the gentlemen riders who eyed her
curiously.  She heard a call from an automobile beside the track and
rode, over to where Harry and Owen were seated in the car.

Their lifted hats as, she bent to shake hands with them caused the
crowd to stare in astonishment.  Pauline, blushing furiously, sped
Firefly to the line.

"That horse works queer," commented Harry, as she rode away.

"Do you think so?" asked Owen.

"Yes, it's on edge, but its legs are shaky.  I wonder..."

But the riders were ready.  The signal sounded.  The crowd's cheer rose
in the names of their various favorites.  Field-glasses were
unbuckled.

"By jolly, Firefly took the first jump in the lead," cried Harry, a
thrill of admiration lightening the worry in his heart.

"He's all right," said Owen.

Over the wide green the horses began to string out, with Firefly
ahead.

"She's going to win it; I believe she is," exclaimed Harry excitedly as
he and Owen stood in the automobile.  "No--no; he wobbled at the
fourth jump.  He's losing ground."

But Firefly seemed suddenly to grip his strength as one horse passed
him.  He pulled himself together under Pauline's urging.  He regained
the lead.

They came down splendidly toward the homestretch.  The bodies of the
powerful beasts rose one by one over the last hedge.

"They're over!  They've won--or, heaven help her!  They're down!"

Leading at the last jump, the drugged heart of the great horse had
conquered his courage.  As he stumbled heavily, Pauline shot over his
head and lay helpless in the path of the other riders.

Harry, dashing madly toward the track, but hopelessly far from her, had
to turn away his head as the crashing hoofs passed her.  When he looked
again, attendants were carrying her swiftly to the clubhouse.  He sped
toward it, Owen following.

Harry tore his way through the excited crowd to the side of Pauline.  A
doctor was administering restoratives.  Pauline opened her eyes and
looked about her bewildered.  She saw Harry's anxious face and smiled
penitently.

"I've--learned a lesson this time," she whispered.

"It is nothing serious--her shoulder bruised a little," said the
doctor.

"Thank Heaven!"  breathed Raymond Owen with well feigned emotion.





CHAPTER XIX

OWEN OFFERS A REWARD

Cries of delight coming, in the voice of Pauline, from the direction
of  the garage made Harry lay down his newspaper and go forth to
investigate.

As he approached he saw Bemis and Lucille's coachman lifting a crate
from a carriage.  From within the crate came the whimpering barks of an
imprisoned bull terrier.

"Oh, isn't he dear?" cried Pauline turning to Harry.

"I don't know, I haven't yet made his acquaintance.  Where did he come
from?"

"Lucille sent him to me.  Johnson just brought him over.  Hurry, Bemis,
and let him out.  The poor darling!"

"Is that what is called puppy love?" inquired Harry.

"Hush," commanded Pauline.  "And Bemis, run and tell Martha to cook
something for him--a beefsteak and potatoes."

"And oysters on the half shell," suggested Harry.

"Love me," announced Pauline sternly, "love my dog."

The coachman had ripped of the last top bar of the crate and a splendid
terrier sprang out with a suddenness that made Pauline retreat a
little.  But, as if he had been trained to his part, he bent his head,
and, with wagging tail, approached her.  In an instant she was kneeling
beside him rewarding his homage with enthusiastic pats and fantastic
encomiums.

"Why, he likes me already--isn't he charming?" she demanded.

Harry threw up his hands-- "And this for a dog--a new dog--possibly
a mad dog!"

"You are a brute."

The dog was making rapid acquaintance with his new home, investigating
the garage and, more profoundly, the kitchen, door.

"Here, Cyrus, come Cyrus," called Pauline, and started towards the
house.  Owen, in his motorcycle togs, was lighting a cigar on the
veranda when they came up the steps.  Without even pretending to enter
into Pauline's enthusiasm over the terrier, he excused himself and
walked off briskly in the direction of the garage.  A few minutes later
they saw him on the motorcycle speeding down the drive.

"I wonder what the impressive business is today," remarked Harry
sarcastically.

"Let poor Owen alone.  He is good and kind even if he doesn't care for
Cyrus."

"Look here!  Why don't you ever say any of these nice things to me--
the things, you say to dogs--and secretaries?"

"Because I've promised to marry you--some day--and it is fatal to
let a husband--even a futurity husband--know that you admire him."

"Well, as long as you do, it is all right."

A half mile down the main road to Westbury a runabout was drawn up, and
a converted gypsy was alternately pretending to repair an imaginary
break and relieving his nerve-strain by pacing the road.  Balthazar's
fantastic garments had given way to a plain sack suit and motor duster,
but the profit of his employment by Raymond Owen was worth the
discomfort of becoming "civilized."

The muttering of a distant motor made him fall to his knees and, wrench
in hand, wiggle hastily under the machine.

To all appearance he was bitterly pre-occupied with the woes of a
stalled tourist when a motorcycle chugged to a stop beside the runabout
and Owen called him.

"I thought you had failed of our appointment, master," he said eagerly
as he crawled out.  "I have waited for more than half an hour."

"It is sad that you should be inconvenienced, old friend," answered
Owen.

"I have done what you commanded me, master," Balthazar said with an
ingratiating smile.  "I have found them."

"Found whom?"

"The friends I spoke about at our last meeting--the little band that
earns money by--making it."

"Oh, yes--your counterfeiters.  Are they to be trusted?"

"Master, all guilty men are to be trusted.  There is always protection
in knowing the sins of others."

"Sometimes, Balthazar, I almost suspect you of possessing a brain.
But, remember, I have told you that I shall soon be through--unless
you accomplish something."

"Master, it is because I dare not risk your freedom--your life.  For
myself I care nothing.  I live to serve you, who have been my
benefactor."

"You lie, of course," remarked Owen casually.  "But what of the new
plan?"

"They are in Bantersville, only twelve miles from Castle Marvin.  A
house that has been long occupied and with no houses near."

"And they are still manufacturing coins there?"

"Yes; but they are becoming frightened.  Two of the distributors have
been arrested.  They would be glad of a safer, a swifter method of
making money."

"Come along, then."

Owen mounted the motorcycle while Balthazar sprang to the seat and
started the runabout.  They sped briskly over the roads, turning at
last into an old weed-grown wagon path fringed copse-like by the
branches of ever-hanging trees.  The machine swished through the
barrier leaves and came out upon a small clearing where there stood a
gaunt house, evidently long deserted.

Balthazar drove on along the road for almost a quarter of a mile before
he stopped the machine, Owen following without question.  They left the
runabout and the motorcycle and walked back to the house.

"It is an excellent location," commented Owen, as Balthazar lead the
way into a basement entrance.  "Who did you say was the man in charge
of the--concern?"

"Rupert Wallace.  He is a world-traveler like yourself, though no match
for you in mind, master."

Balthazar, as he spoke, was rapping lightly on a wall, which had no
sign of a door.  It was pitch dark where they stood.  But suddenly with
hardly a sound, two sliding doors opened to the Gypsy's signal and a
faint light from a gas jet on the wall gleamed on an inner passage.
Balthazar, closely followed by Owen, walked quickly down the secret
hall, and, without signal this time, another set of silent doors opened
upon a brightly lighted room.

A crabbed, withered woman admitted them.

The room was overheated because of the presence of a gas forge on which
a cauldron of metal was being melted.  On one side there was a stamping
press, and on the other a set of molds.

Wallace noted Owen's curiosity, and stepping to the table in the middle
of the room, picked up a handful of half-dollar pieces.

"You are interested in our work--the work of supplying the poor with
sufficient funds to meet the increased cost of living," he said,
smiling.  "These are some of our product.  We are proud of them.  The
weight is exactly that of the true fifty-cent piece.  And only one man
in fifty could tell the difference in the ring of the metal."

Owen looked at the coins in sincere admiration.

"It is very remarkable," he said.  "But Balthazar tells me--"

"I know.  You have a little business of secrecy for myself and my
friends.  You may speak here in perfect safety, Mr. Owen.  Gossip is
not a fault--or a possibility--of our profession."

"I do not believe there is anything to say but what Balthazar has
already told you, except--"

Owen hesitated.

"Except what, master?  Is there a change in the plan?" asked
Balthazar.

"I think there might be.  Something occurred today that might give us a
favorable lead.  Miss Pauline received as a gift a terrier dog.  I
believe it could be made use of."

"In what way?" asked the counterfeiter.

"By stealing it and bringing it here."

"I don't understand--ah, yes; indeed I do."

"Excellent, master," exclaimed Balthazar.  "It could be done today.
Can I have two of your men, Rupert?"

"Yes; take Gaston and Firenzi.  They are always to be trusted."

At his words two men, stepped forward.  One of them had been working at
the metal pots.  But in response to a hurried word from Rupert he
quickly threw off his cap and apron, and caught up a hat and coat.

Rupert Wallace stepped to the side of the room where a pair of upright
levers stood out of the floor like the levers of an automobile.

He pulled the one nearest him and the sliding doors parted softly.
Owen and Balthazar, with their new escort, stepped through.  For a
moment, Wallace waited.  Then he drew back the other lever, and the
departing guests found as they reached the end of the secret passage,
that their path opened, almost magically before them, in the hushed
unfolding of the second door.

"Goodbye, Cyrus," said, Harry as Pauline strolling down the garden with
him, tossed to her new pet a dainty from the box of bon-bons she
carried.

"What do you mean by that?" she demanded.

"That the oysters on the half shell would be better for his health."

"I didn't give him oysters on the half shell."

"No; but you gave him everything else in the house.  He is stuffed like
the fatted calf--or like the prodigal son--I don't care which--"

"If he likes candy he shall have candy," declared Pauline, sitting down
on an arbor bench and extending another sugar-plum to the dog.

The gratitude of Cyrus was expressed in a leap  to the side of his
mistress.  As Harry sat down, he discovered that Cyrus had occupied the
favored place beside Pauline.  Next instant there was a yowl of dismay
and the adored gift of Lucille fell several feet away from the bench.

"Harry!  I think that is dreadful!" exclaimed Pauline, springing to her
feet.

"I do, too," he answered.  "That was why I threw it off the bench."

"To treat a poor innocent dumb creature like that!"

"Polly!  You don't mean it, do you?  You think I hurt him?"

"You've-hurt-his-feelings."

"That doesn't matter, but if I've hurt yours--it does.  I apologize."

"You are always joking.  You don't understand how sweet and dear
animals are.  You will probably treat me the same way after we are
married."

She ran to the spot where the wary Cyrus was munching the last piece of
candy.  But he accepted her caresses without enthusiasm, keeping a
careful eye on Harry.

She called to the dog and walked briskly toward the house.

But Cyrus did not follow.  The box of candy was still on the garden
bench, and Cyrus was not immune to temptation.

Owen followed on his motorcycle the runabout in which Balthazar and the
two chosen members of Rupert Wallace's band made their swift journey
toward Castle Marvin.

A quarter of a mile from the grounds Owen drew alongside.

"This would be a good place to stop.  The car can be hidden in the
lane."

"Yes; master," said Balthazar.

He wheeled the machine upon a narrow roadway into the cover of the
woods, and, with his companions, got out.  Owen rode on ahead and was
waiting for them as they neared the little foot path gate to the Marvin
grounds.

"Look through the hedge there," he directed.

Balthazar crawled on his hands and knees to the box wall that
surrounded the grounds.  He thrust his shoulders through the bush and
gazed for a moment at the dog devouring Pauline's bon-bons on the
bench.

"I should say it would be well to act now--instantly, master," he
cried, returning.

"Go on.  I will be at the house, and will try to hold them back if
there is any noise."

As Owen began to wheel his cycle up the drive to Castle Marvin,
Balthazar and his two aides wriggled through the hedge-row, crossed a
strip of sward and reached the bench.  Balthazar caught the dog's head
in his powerful hands.  There was not a sound.  The animal's muzzle was
shut fast and in a minute it had been tied, leg and body.  They ran to
the gate, to the runabout, and were away.

"Why Harry, I can't find him anywhere.  What could have happened to
him?" cried Pauline, rushing into the library.

"Owen lost?  Thank Heaven!" he exclaimed fervently.

"No; Cyrus.  Harry it's your fault.  He was angry because you pushed
him off the bench and he ran away."

"Polly," he said, wheeling in his chair, "I am not worried.  I decline
to be worried.  And I am going away from here."

"Not before you help me find Cyrus."

"Yes--long before."

She turned and whisked crossly out of the room.

Harry picked up his hat and coat, and in a few minutes was being driven
away by Farrell on an urgent call to town.

Pauline stood on the veranda and watched his departure with silent
wrath.

"I wonder if he is really cruel--or--if he is just a man and
doesn't know any better," she pondered audibly.

Then, as she saw Owen approaching from the side path, "Oh, Owen, won't
you help me?  I've lost Cyrus!"

"Cyrus?  Am I sure whom you mean?  Ah, yes; the new member of our
family circle."

"Yes; he's gone."

"The only thing to do, I should say, is to advertise.  I will call up
the newspapers immediately, Miss Pauline."

"You are dear!  I must have him back.  Think what Lucille would say if
I lost him on the first day!"

"I'll offer a generous reward and he'll soon be back."

"Thank you, Owen."





CHAPTER XX

CYRUS MAKES A REPUTATION

The proceedings behind the hidden doors in the cellar of the ruined
house between Bathwater and Castle Marvin were not interrupted by so
small a matter as the kidnapping of an heiress--a kidnapping that had
progressed no further as yet than the capture of a dog.

As Owen stepped into the den the next forenoon he saw the bull terrier
tied to the wall.

"I see we have the main ingredient of the repast in hand."

"The main ingredient and the most dangerous," said Wallace.  "He has
done nothing but howl and bark.  May we kill him?"

"Not yet," answered Owen.  "It is possible that she might demand sight
of him before entering the house, or some nonsense of that sort.  I
would let him howl a little longer."

"Very well," laughed Wallace.  "What orders have you for us today,
sir?"

The other counterfeiters kept steadily on at their work over the
melting pots, the molds and stamping machines.  The old woman was
stacking half-dollar pieces at the table.

"Why do you have the woman here?" demanded Owen suddenly.

"To prevent starvation," answered Wallace.  "Carrie is not only our
purchasing agent, but our excellent cook."

The hag looked up for a moment with a cackle of appreciation; then bent
again to her work.

"Can she write?" asked Owen.

"Yes."

"Well, then, she can help us.  Here is an advertisement which appears
in the morning papers."

He presented a newspaper clipping to Wallace, which read:

LOST--A fine white bull terrier.  Finder will receive liberal reward
if dog is returned to Pauline Marvin.  Castle Marvin, N. Y.

"What do you want Carrie to do?"

"Answer the advertisement.  Just call her over here."

The hag laid down the coins and moved laboriously to the, table.
Wallace produced from a drawer a pen, paper and ink, and told the woman
to take his chair.  Owen dictated:

"Miss Pauline Marvin:

"A dog came to my house yesterday which I think is the one you advertise
for.  I am an old, crippled woman and it's hard for me to get out.
Can't you come and see if it is your dog?

"Mary Sheila, 233 Myrtle Avenue."

The old woman wrote slowly in a shaking hand, and Owen waited patiently
while she addressed an envelope.  Then he placed the letter in the
envelope, sealed it, and took his leave.

"And no sign of Cyrus?" inquired Harry cheerily as he entered the
library, where Pauline sat disconsolate.

She did not even answer and she was still gazing dejectedly out of the
window when Bemis brought in the mail.  Two of the letters she laid
aside, unread; the third, she opened: "A dog came to my house yesterday
--"  Her face lighted with hope and happiness; she read no further.

"Oh, isn't Owen--splendid," she breathed.  "He knew just what to
do."  And with the letter in her hand she ran out to the veranda.

"Harry! Harry!" she called across the garden.  There was no answer.

"Run up to Mr. Marvin's room and see if he is there, Margaret.  Bemis,
go out and see if he is at the garage."

"No, Miss Marvin," said Bemis.  "He has gone into Westbury."

Pauline stood silent for a moment.

"Well, then I must go myself," she said with quick decision.

She sped upstairs and within a few minutes was, out at the garage in
her motoring dress.  A mechanic was working over her racing car in
front of the garage, the racing car that was just recovering from
recent calamity in the international race.

"Is it all fixed, Employ?  Can I drive it today?" she asked eagerly.

"Why--yes, ma'am--you could," said the mechanic.  "But I haven't got
it polished up yet."

"That doesn't matter in the least.  I want to use it to day--now."

She sprang lightly to the seat of the lithe racer and in a moment was
away down the drive.

NO. 233 Myrtle avenue was an address a little difficult to find.
Myrtle avenue was well outside the new town and Pauline had made
several inquiries before an elderly man, whom she found in the
telegraph office, volunteered directions.

She thanked him, and drove back for two miles before she found the turn
he had indicated.

The appearance of the place was unprepossessing enough to dampen even
the ambitious courage of Pauline.  But the sight of woman on the porch
training a vine over the front door, allayed her fears.

"You are Mrs. Sheila--you sent me a message that you had found my
dog?" she asked, approaching.

For a moment the confusion that the woman had meant to simulate was
sincere.  She had expected to see no such vision as that of Pauline on
the blackened steps of the coiners' den.

"A dog?" she quavered vaguely.  Then, "Oh, yes, my--dear little lady
--the pretty white dog.  He came to us yesterday.  My son he brought
me the newspaper, and--"

"Oh, you are just a dear," cried Pauline.  "May I see him now?  I am so
fond of him!"

"Yes, my little lady.  Will you come in?"

Pauline followed her into the basement.  She stepped back with a tremor
of suspicion as the woman rapped three times upon the folding doors,
and they opened silently on their oiled rails.  But she was inside the
narrow passage, and the light that gleamed through the second pair of
doors allayed her anxiety.  With a bow and the wave of a directing
hand, the old woman waited for Pauline to enter.

In a breath she was seized from both sides.  Strong cruel hands held
her, while Wallace smothered her cries with a tight-drawn bandage.

She had hardly had time to see the little terrier tugging at his chain
in the corner of the room, but his wild barking was all she knew of
possible assistance in the plight in which she found herself.

They laid her on the floor.  She heard a voice that seemed strangely
familiar giving abrupt orders.  Pauline sought in vain to place the
memory of the voice of Balthazar, the Gypsy.

Suddenly she heard cries.  The barking of the dog had stopped and there
was the thud of heavy foot steps on the stone floor of the cellar.

"Catch him!  Shoot if you have to," came the command in the
mysteriously familiar voice.  She felt that  her captors were no longer
near.  There was a beat of rushing foot-steps on the floor.

It was several minutes before she heard voices again.

"The cur hasn't been there long enough to know her.  It won't make any
difference," said Wallace, coming through the open doors.  "But I'm
sorry it got away."

"Where is Miss Pauline?" asked Harry, as he entered the house on his
return from Westbury.

"She has found her dog, sir," answered Margaret, smiling.  "She went to
get him--with the racing car."

His brow darkened.  "The advertisement was answered, you mean,
Margaret?"

"I think so, sir."

An hour later he walked into the garden and sat down on the rustic
bench where he and Pauline had quarreled.  He had just taken up his
newspaper when he was startled by the spring of a small warm body
fairly into his face.  Lowering the torn paper, he saw Pauline's dog
cavorting around the bench in circles of excitement.

The animal rushed towards him again, but did not leap this time.  It
came very near and, with braced feet, began to bark wildly.

Harry stood up.  The dog, with another volley of barks, started towards
the gate.  Harry followed instinctively.  The terrier dashed ahead of
him, reached the, gate, returned, renewed the appealing barks, and
again led the way.

In another minute Harry was following the urgent little guide.  He was
thoroughly stirred now.  As the dog returned to him the second time,
with its appealing yelps, he quickened his speed.

After traversing five miles of dust-laden road they reached a certain
house on the thoroughfare, which still carried the dignity of  "Myrtle
avenue."

The dog rushed up the steps.  Harry, following closely, was surprised
to find the door was ajar.  He entered and found himself in the cellar
passageway.

A sound outside made him grasp the broken rope on the collar of the
dog.  It was an automobile wheezing to a stop and it was followed by
the sound of voices.  The outer door opened.  Harry drew the dog aside
into the darkness and held its muzzle tight.

Four men entered.  One rapped on the wall and the panels opened
softly.  The man went in.

Harry's hand had fallen on a slim stick as he stooped in the darkness,
and he slipped the stick into the aperture between the folding doors.
He carried the dog to the outer door and thrust it through.  Then he
came back.

"Who is the woman?" asked a gruff voice.

"She does not concern you.  Have you distributed all of the coins?"

"All but $5,000.  She's a peach, ain't she?"

The door crashed at their heels.  Harry was in the room.  He had
gripped Wallace by the throat before the man could stir.  The others
backed toward their hidden weapons.  Shots blazed in the room but the
smoke was protection for Harry, swinging wildly at whomsoever he saw.

"You're there, Polly?"

"Yes," she gasped, tugging at her bonds in desperation.  She was almost
free.

Harry had Wallace at his feet and Wallace's gun was in his hand.  He
blazed blindly through room.  A shriek told of one man gone.

Pauline felt strong hands grasp her.  She was whisked through the
door; through the outer door and away, into the fresh air, and into the
waiting automobile.  She felt Harry's hot breath on her fore head as
they sped in flight.

There was clamor behind them for a moment car was starting.  Then came
only the thrash of footsteps through the grassy road as the coiners
rushed to their own machine.

One stern command reached the ears of Pauline and Harry as they sped
on:

"It's your lives or theirs.  Get them or kill yourselves."

"It's no use, Polly.  Come," cried Harry, after a time.

His voice sounded grim, peremptory.  The machine with a sudden swerve
had gone almost off the road with an exploded tire.  It was only
Harry's powerful hand that had saved them from wreck.

But as he helped Pauline out and led her on a run into the forest he
heard the sound of the pursuing machine coming to a stop and the tumult
of voices behind them.  He knew that one peril had only been supplanted
by another.

"Where--Where are we going, Harry?"

"The Gorman camp--if we can make it; if we can reach the river."

"There's the old quarry," she exclaimed as they came out on the crest
of a blast-gnarled cliff overlooking a stream.  "I know their camp is
near the quarry."

"But on the other side of the river.  Don't talk; run," he pleaded,
leading her down a footpath that traced a winding way over the face of
the cliff into the quarry.

In the shelter of the rocks there stood two small buildings about five
hundred yards apart.  One was the old tool house of the deserted
quarry.  The other was a hunter's hut, evidently newly built.

A commanding cry came from the top of the cliff.

"Halt or we fire!"

They ran on.  A shot echoed and a bullet flattened itself against the
stone base of the quarry not two yards from Pauline.

"In here--quick," said Harry, dragging her to the hunter's lodge and
thrusting her through the open door.  There was another shot and the
thud of another bullet as he slammed the door.

"It looks like a fight now, Polly," he said, as he' moved quickly around
the hut.  "And thank Heaven--here's something to fight with."

From a rack in the wall he lifted down a Winchester rifle and a belt of
cartridges.  "Get into the corner and lie down," he ordered.

"No, give me the revolver," cried Pauline.

She did not wait for his protest, but drew from hilt coat pocket the
pistol he had wrested from Wallace.

For an instant he looked at her with mingled admiration, love and
fear.  He opened the little window of the hut, aimed and fired three
shots at the group of six men who were running down the cliff path.

"Into the tool house," ordered Balthazar, stopping only for a glance at
one of his fellows who had fallen.  The five gained the workmen's hut
and burst the door open.  Immediately from the air hole and the wide
chinks in the sagging walls came a blaze of shots.

A small white dog ran down the path into the quarry, but no one saw
it.

Balthazar was searching the tool-house.  "Ha!" he exclaimed suddenly.
"That is what we want!"  He lifted from the floor a box of blasting
powder.  But the next instant he dropped it and sprawled, cursing,
beside the half-spilled contents.  Another man, shot through the body,
had fallen over his leader.

Balthazar quickly recovered himself.  He whisked about the hut and
found a coil of fuse.  The shots were still dinning in his ears while
he fashioned, with the powder and the box and the fuse, a bomb powerful
enough to have shattered tons of imbedded stone.

"Stop shooting," he commanded.  "Here's a better way!"

As he suddenly threw open the door and dashed out, he nearly fell over
the dog whining in terror.  But Balthazar kept on.  In a better
business--with a heart in him--he would have been counted among the
bravest of men.  Running a swaying, zigzag course, in the very face of
the fire of Harry and Pauline, he reached the hunter's hut and dropped
the bomb beside it.

He did not try to return.  With the long fuse in his hand he moved into
shelter behind the hut, struck a match, lighted the fuse, and fled
toward the river.

After him ran the small white dog.

Balthazar turned and uttered a scream of rage.  He dashed at the
animal, which dodged and passed him.  In its teeth it held the bomb he
had just laid at the risk of his life.  The fuse was sputtering behind
as the dog fled.

Balthazar pursued desperately.  The path to the river led through a
narrow defile of rock.  But the beast was not trapped at the water's
edge as the Gypsy had expected.  It took to the water with a wide
plunge.

Balthazar turned away, cursing.  He rushed back to the huts.  The guns
and pistols were silent.  He picked up from the side of the path a huge
piece of wood.  As he neared his companions, he shouted:

"Come out! Rush them, You cowards!  Follow me!"

Harry fired his last two shots and two men fell.  Pauline had long ago
emptied the revolver.

Three men came on.  There was a crash as the log in Balthazar's mighty
hands beat down the door and he staggered through.

But Harry was upon him.  He hurled the Gypsy across the room.  He
charged at the others and one went down.

Through the door came four men.

"It's Harry.  Help him!" cried Pauline.

Balthazar charged straight at the newcomers but he did not attempt to
fight.  He was out through the door and away to the river before they
could intercept him.  Within a few moments his companions lay bound on
the hut floor.

"But how did you find out?  How did you know we needed you?" asked
Pauline afterward of young Richard Gorman, whose camping party had been
the rescuers.

"That's the girl who told us," he said, pointing to a dejected little
bull terrier that stood, quaking with excitement, a few feet away.

"Cyrus!" cried Pauline, running and clutching the little terrier in her
arms.

"Yes, he brought us the dead bomb and we knew something was up."





CHAPTER XXI

THE GUEST OF HONOR

"Well, prove it," said Harry.  "Show me that you mean it!"

"Why, Harry, what a woman says she, always means."

"Always means not to do."

"But, Harry, really I'm going to be good this time," pleaded Pauline.

They were emerging from the gate of the Marvin mansion to the avenue,
and as Harry turned to Pauline with a skeptical reply on his lips, the
approach of a young man of military bearing stopped him.

"By Jove, isn't that--who the deuce is it?  Why, Benny Summers!"

The young man was hurrying by without recognition, when Harry called
sharply:  "Hello, Ben!"

"Harry--Harry Marvin!  By the coin of Croesus, is it really you?"

"No," said Harry, grasping his hand, "not the 'you' you used to know.
I've been driven into premature old age by caring for a militant
sister.  Polly, this is Ensign Summers of the navy.  Please promise me
that you won't get him into danger, because he used to be a friend of
mine.  He has never done anything more dangerous than run a submarine
and shoot torpedoes out of it in a field of mines."

"A submarine?  Torpedoes?" cried Pauline.  "Isn't that beautiful."

"But, Benny, how are you?  What have you been doing?  I haven't seen
you in a thousand years."

"I'm still at it.  And I've got it, Harry.  I give you my word, I
have."

"Got what?"

"The torpedo--I mean THE torpedo, in capital letters and italics with
a line under the word.  I've invented one that would blow--well--
I've got it."

"Congratulations, felicitations, laudatory, remarks, and enthusiasm,"
cried Harry.  "Without having slightest idea what a torpedo is, I
rejoice with you.  Come on back to the house, and tell us about it."

"I'm sorry, I can't, Harry, now.  I'm engaged for a conference with the
Naval Board, and I'm late already.  But will you and Miss Marvin come
to luncheon with me tomorrow?"

"Why not you with us, we saw you first?"

Summers laughed.  "Well, for this reason, I want you to meet Mlle. de
Longeon, who will preside at this particular luncheon, and who is--"

The flush that came suddenly to the cheeks of the young officer brought
involuntary laughter from Harry and Pauline.

"I take that as an acceptance--the Kerrimore, East Fifty-sixth
street," he called, sharing in their laughter as he fled.

But at the gate of the Marvin house he came upon Raymond Owen.  There
was a hasty clasp of hands and "You're to come, too," cried Summers,
continuing his flight.

"Where am I to come?" asked Owen, as he approached Harry and Pauline.

"To luncheon with Ensign Summers tomorrow.  Isn't he dear?  I love men
who blush.  They seem so innocent."

"The Fates defend us!" implored Harry.

    *   *   *   *   *

Ensign Summers had gained a position beyond his rank in the navy.  A
natural bent toward science and a patriotic bent toward the use of
science as a means of national defense had inspired him to experiments
which had resulted in success amazing even to himself.  He had been
allowed--during the year preceding the meeting with Harry and Pauline
--a leave of absence.  In that time he had visited Italy, France,
England and Germany, and had studied under naval experts.  He had come
back home with his own little idea undiminished in its importance to
his own mind, and he had proceeded with youthful enthusiasm and
effrontery to prove its importance to the highest of his commanders.

The tests now about to be made--tests of a new torpedo gun and new
torpedo--had been ordered by the mightiest in the land.  Triumphant
in his discovery and wealthy in his own right, Summers was the happiest
of men.  It was in Paris that he had met Mlle. del Longeon.
Exquisitely beautiful, of the alluring and languorous type, quick of
wit, tactful, and with great charm of manner, she had completely
fascinated the young officer.  He had vowed his adoration of her almost
before he knew her.  His avowals had been repulsed with just that
margin of insincerity that would double his ardor.

It had required many letters to induce Mlle. de Longeon to leave her
beloved Paris and visit friends in America.  Summers knew she was not a
Frenchwoman, but he was totally in the dark as to what was her
nationality.  Summers didn't care.  He was madly mad in love with her,
and there was no other thing to consider.

It was for this reason that Mlle. de Longeon was the guest of honor at
the little luncheon in his rooms, to which he had invited Harry and
Pauline.  The affair was quite informal.  There were a number of navy
men present, a few young married people.  The atmosphere of the
gathering was "sublimely innocuous," as Mlle. de Longeon remarked to
Summers in the hall after the guests had departed.

But Mlle. de Longeon had met one guest who did not impress her as
innocuous--or sublime--Raymond Owen.  Pauline had presented the
secretary on his arrival, and Owen had immediately devoted himself to
her.  Not long after luncheon was served the voice of Mlle. de Longeon
rose suddenly above the general talk.

"But, Mr. Summers, you have not told us yet of your new invention.
When shall the plans be ready?  When shall you rise to the realization
of your true success?"

Summers beamed his happiness in the face of the brazen compliment, like
the good and silly boy he was.

"I'm supposed to keep this secret," he answered, "but I can trust every
one here, I know.  The plans are going to be sent out day after
tomorrow."

"You mean you will have them completed--all those intricate plans?"
queried Mlle. de Longeon in a tone of breathless admiration.

"I'll work all tonight and most of tomorrow; but, of course, it's only
a case of putting into words ideas that have already been put into
solid metal.  My gun and torpedo are ready for work.  It isn't so very
difficult, and it's--well, it's a lot of fun."

"And great honor," paid the woman he loved.

For a moment their eyes met, but only for a moment.  The next, Catin,
the valet, who was taking charge of the luncheon, under pretense of
anticipating a waiter moved quickly to fill her wine glass.  Even the
subtle eye of Owen was not sharp enough to see Mlle. de Longeon pass
him a crushed slip of paper, and she had been too long trained to
concealment of even the simplest emotions to betray uneasiness now.

Nevertheless, there was the possibility of surprising Mlle. de Longeon,
and that possibility was realized as she glanced at Raymond Owen.  His
set, tense face reflected for the moment all his hatred of Harry and
Pauline, who were talking blithely with Ensign Summers, another naval
officer and two of the wives of the civilian visitors.  She turned to
him with a suddenness that would have seemed abrupt in the manner of
one less beautiful.

"Mr. Owen, do come to see me," she said.  "I am sure--at least I
think I am sure--that we have many matters of mutual interest."

In her softly modulated tones, the invitation had no significance
beyond the literal meaning of the words.

"It will be an honor," he answered.

"Tomorrow evening, then?"

"Delighted.  And, later, the Naval Ball?"

"No, I'm afraid the Ensign will not permit any one else to take me to
the ball; but we shall meet there, afterward."

In a New York street, among the lower there was at that time a foreign
agency that was not a consulate, but was visited by diplomats of the
highest rank in a certain nation, the name of which, or the mystery of
whose suspicions, need not be touched upon.

There was no regular staff at the agency.  The rooms were maintained
under the name of a certain foreign gentleman--or, rather, under the
name that he chose to assume.  There were two servants, but they saw
little of the master of the house.  He was seldom at home, but when he
was, he had many visitors.

An hour after the luncheon in the rooms of Ensign Summers, the master
of the mysterious dwelling was at home.  And he had four guests.  It
would have, greatly surprised Ensign Summers had he known that one of
the diplomat's guests was his own man servant, Catin.

"It is the worst duty I have ever had to perform,"  the diplomat said
solemnly.  "It means, almost certainly, your death.  But it is death
for your country.  It is the command of your country.  The submarine
must be destroyed and the plans--we shall get the plans through
another agent."

"I am not afraid to die," said Catin.

"Then here is the model of a submarine--not of the one you will
enter, of course, but it will give you an idea.  I have marked the
place where you will secrete the explosive until the proper moment.  I
have also indicated the position for you to take in order to have some
faint chance of reaching the surface and being saved."

One of the other men stepped forward and handed Catin a small square
box.  "This is the explosive.  You know how to handle it."

With a military salute, Catin turned and left the place.  Within half
an hour he was carefully brushing Ensign Summers' clothes, as Summers
came in.

"Would it be too much to ask, sir," inquired the perfect valet, "that
I might accompany you in the submarine?  I am afraid you will be very
uncomfortable without me."

Summers laughed good-naturedly.

"It's impossible, Catin.  This boat is a government secret in itself,
and my new torpedo makes it a double secret.  No one but a picked crew
will be allowed on it, except--"

"'Except, sir?"

"Well, I admit I could command it.  But it would be very unwise, Catin,
and, I assure you, I shall get along all right."

Mlle. de Longeon's apartment was characteristic of the lady herself.
The artist would have found it a little too luxurious for good taste--
a little over-toned in the richness of draperies, the heavy scent of
flowers, the subtleties of half-screened divans--there was something
more than feminine--something feline.  To Raymond Owen, however, it
was ideal.  The dimmed ruby lights, the suggestive shadows of the
tapestries, were in tune with the surreptitious mind of the secretary.
But there remained for him a picture that he admired more--Mlle. de
Longeon coming through the portieres with a cry of pleasure.

"I am so glad you came--and so sorry I must send you away quickly,"
exclaimed Mlle. de Longeon.  "The little ensign has telephoned that he
is coming early to take me for a drive before the ball."

"I can come again--if I may have the honor," said Owen, rising
quickly.

"Oh, there is time for a word," she said, smiling.

"There was something you wished to say to me, was there not?  Something
you did not care to say at the luncheon yesterday?"

"Yes.  Why do you hate Miss Marvin?"

Owen was silent for a moment.  "Why do you hate the little ensign, as
you call another?"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean that we can be of service to one another, in all likelihood,
and that, therefore, we should be frank friends.  You wish to have
Pauline Marvin out of the way, do you not?"

"How did you find that out?"

"People engaged in similar business find out many things.  Now I--"

"Wish to be rid of Ensign Summers."

"Precisely."

"You are an international agent?"

"Yes.  And I offer you my aid and the aid of the powerful men I control
in return for your aid to me and them.  Is it a bargain?"

They were seated on one of the curtained divans, a low-turned light
above them.  She leaned forward.  Her long, delicate hand touched his.
A splendid jewel at her throat heightened the magic of her beauty.

"Because it is my business to hate him--and make love to him at the
same time.  Come, Mr. Owen, let us be frank."

For the first time in his life Owen felt himself mastered by the sheer
fascination of a woman.  "What am I to do?" he said breathlessly.

"I will tell you tonight at the ball.  Now you must run away."

He arose instantly, but as she stood beside him, he turned, caught her
in his arms and kissed her passionately.

She protested with a little cry and a struggle not too violent to
damage her coiffure.  He drew back from her.  There was something of
astonishment in his eyes--astonishment at himself.

"You are the only woman in the world who ever made me do that," he
gasped.

"Go, go," she pleaded.

"But you are angry?  You break our agreement?"

"No, but I am overcome.  I shall meet you tonight."

He caught her hand to his lips, and hurried from the house.

It was more than an hour after he observed her arrival at the Naval
Ball before Owen had the privilege of a greeting from Mlle. de Longeon,
and then it was only a smile as she passed him on the arm of a
distinguished looking foreign diplomat.

Owen saw that she spoke a quiet word to her escort, who turned and
looked at Owen.  She beamed brightly at Owen, who smiled back at her,
and moved slowly toward the door of the conservatory into which she and
the diplomat had disappeared.  He was surprised, a moment later, to see
Pauline rush by him, with a little laugh.

"Is anything the matter?" Owen called.

"Nothing you can help.  Stay right where you are," she cried.

Owen laughed his understanding and moved over to where Harry and
Lucille were talking with Ensign Summers.

Meanwhile, Pauline, in the darkest recess of the conservatory was
pinning together a broken garter.  As she started back to the ballroom
she was surprised to hear voices near her.

There was something about their foreign accent that roused the
ever-venturous, ever-curious interest of Pauline.  She crept along a
row of palms and peered through an aperture.  Mlle. de Longeon and the
diplomat were talking together as they paced the aisle of palms on the
other side.  Pauline crept nearer.

Presently the voice of the diplomat became distinguishable.

"It is all arranged.  The thing is to be done in Submarine B-2
tomorrow.  All you have now to do is--"

Pauline could not catch the final words.

The two moved back to the ballroom.  She followed close behind, a
little suspicious, but with the thrill of a new plan gripping her.

She saw Ensign Summers step forward early to greet Mile. de Longeon.
Another dance was beginning.

"This one is Mr. Owen's," said Mile. de Longeon, as she moved away on
the arm of the secretary.

"Have you anything to tell me?" he asked.

"Yes.  Induce her to make Summers take her down in his submarine
tomorrow, and she will never trouble you again."

As the dance ended, Pauline and Harry, Summers and Lucille, joined
them.

"Mr. Summers, I have a great request to make," declared Pauline.

"I grant it before you breathe a word," he answered.

"I want you to take me along on your submarine trip tomorrow."

"Polly, have you gone crazy all over again?" cried Harry.

"I don't believe it would be--" began Summers.

"It must be," she commanded.

"Well, I promised too soon, but I'll keep my word."

Owen and Mile. de Longeon had stepped aside.

"What does it mean?" gasped the secretary.  "She is doing the very
thing we want her to do."

"Sometimes Fate aids the worthy," said Mile. de Longeon softly.





CHAPTER XXII

SUBMARINE B-2

At the dock of the navy yard a submarine lay ready for departure.

There was nothing about its appearance to indicate that its mission was
of more than ordinary importance.  But it was an unusual thing to see a
woman aboard, and the curiosity of the crew was matched by that of the
young officers who had come down to see Summers off on his voyage of
many chances.

The officers got little reward for their considerate interest.  Ensign
Summers was engaged.  He was explaining to Pauline, as they stood on
the deck of the war-craft, the entire history of submarines from the
time of Caesar, or Washington, or somebody to the present day, and
Pauline was listening with that childlike simplicity which women use
for the purpose of making men look foolish.

"By Jove!  I thought he was tied,  heart and hope, to the lovely
foreigner," exclaimed one of the shoreward observers.

"So he is," said another.  "But Mlle. de Longeon isn't interested in
his daily toil.  Do you know who the young lady up there is?"

"No.  She must have got a dispensation from the secretary himself to go
on this trip."

"So she did--easy as snapping your thumb.  She's Miss Pauline Marvin,
daughter of the richest man that has died in twenty years."

The boat gong sounded the signal of departure.

Summers, with a hasty apology, left Pauline and stepped forward.  The
engines began to rumble.  The deadly and delicate craft--masterpiece
of modern naval achievement--drew slowly from the pier.

There was a shout.

Summers, delivering rapid orders on deck, turned with an expression of
annoyance to see his faithful man servant, Catin, out of breath and
excited, rushing toward the boat.

Summers ordered the vessel stopped.  It had moved not more than
stepping distance from the pier and in a moment Catin was beside his
master on the deck.

"She told me it must--" he paused, gasping for breath.

"Who told you what?" demanded Summers.

"Mlle. de Longeon.  I am sure it is a message of importance.  She told
me I must give it to you before you risked your life on the voyage."

"Mlle. de Longeon!" He caught the letter from Catin's hand.

"My Hero--I cannot keep the secret any longer, cannot wait to tell
you that it is you I love.  Estelle de Longeon."

Summers walked slowly, dizzily up the deck was in an ecstasy.  He was
oblivious to all the world--even to Pauline, who stood questioning an
officer at the rail.  The fact that his servant, Catin, slipped
silently down the hatchway to the main compartment, and thence on to
the pump room at the vessel's bottom, would hardly have interested him
---even if he had known it.

"Shall we put off, sir?"

The second officer saluted.

The Ensign came to himself instantly.  "Yes, of course.  I put back
only for an important message," he said.  "My man got off, did he?"

"I think so."

"All right. Go ahead."

Catin, with that rare fortune which sometimes favors the wicked, had
chosen precisely the right moment for his ruse.  The crew of the
submarine were all on deck save those in the engine room, and his quick
passage to the vitals of the vessel was unseen.

Once in the pump room, he hastily drew from under his coat the bomb
placed in his hands at the conference of diplomats, wound its
clock-work spring and laid it beside the pumps.

There was a strange look on the man's face as he did this--a look at
once proud and pitiful.  Catin had not sense of treachery or shame.
The deed in itself did not lack the dignity of courage, for, with the
others, he was planned his own death.  And while the others were to die
suddenly, ignorant of their peril, Catin was to die in deliberate
knowledge of it.

On deck Pauline was eagerly questioning an under officer about the
torpedoes, when Summers came up.

"You'll have to come down and see for yourself," he said, overhearing
her.

"First I'll show you the pump room--the most important part of us,"
he was saying as Catin, in the boat's bottom, first caught the sound of
nearing voices.

Catin leaped up the steps from the pump room.  He was in the nick of
time.  A large locker in the main compartment gave him refuge just as
Pauline and Summers reached the room.

"The pumps are our life-savers," said Summers, as he directed Pauline
down the second ladder.  "If they go wrong when we're under water we
can't come up."

"And what do you do then?" asked Pauline innocently.

"Oh, just-stay down."

Catin waited breathless in his hiding place until they returned.  "By
heaven, they didn't find it!" he breathed eagerly.

Pauline and Ensign Summers stood at the rail watching the foamy rush of
a fast motor boat, when a hail sounded across the water.

A man was standing up in the motor boat and calling through a
megaphone.

Summers raised his glasses.  "Do you know who that is?" he asked
laughingly.

"Of course not.  What does he want?"

"It's Harry, and I suspect he wants to take you away from us."

Pauline uttered an exclamation of annoyance.

"Isn't he silly!" she cried, "One would think I was, a baby, the way he
watches me."

Soon the voice of Harry could be plainly distinguished.

"Clear your ship; I am going to sink you," he called.

"Cargo too precious this trip; don't do it," answered Summers.

"Let me take the megaphone," demanded Pauline.

"What do you mean by following us?" she cried.

"I don't trust that sardine can, and I want a regular boat on hand when
you are wrecked."

"I am very angry with you. It looks as if--"

Her words were drowned in Summers' laughter.

"Never mind.  I know a way we can escape from him," he said.

"How?"

"Why, sink the boat."

"That will be splendid."

He stepped aside and gave a terse order.  Delightedly, Pauline watched
the brief, machine-like movements of the crew trimming the deck.
Summers escorted her back to the conning tower.  They descended.
Within a few moments the wonderful craft was buried under the waves.

"There he is--looking for us," laughed Summers, as he made room for
Pauline at the periscope.

Amazed, fascinated, she gazed from what seemed the bottom of the sea
out upon the rolling surface of the waves.  Harry's motorboat was near
and he was standing in the bow, scanning the water with binoculars.

"And he can't see us?" asked Pauline.

"Oh, yes, he'll pick up out periscope after a while.  Shall we fire
the torpedo at him?"

"Yes, please," said Pauline.

Summers' laugh was cut short.  As if someone had taken his jest in
earnest and really fired a projectile, the crash of an explosion came
from the bottom of the boat.

"Stay here--" ordered Summers with a set face as he joined the rush of
seamen into the pump room.

But Pauline followed.

An officer, with blanched face but steady voice, came up to Summers.

"What was it, Grimes?"

"It seems to have been a bomb, sir.  There was no powder down there."

The face of the Ensign darkened with suspicion and alarm.

"A bomb?  So they were going after us--the enemy!  We'd better get
right up and back to port, Grimes."

"I have to report, sir--the pumps are disabled."

Summers turned with a look of pity toward Pauline, who stood at his
elbow.

"And we can't get up again?" she questioned.

"There is one chance, but--"  He stopped openly and listened.  "Open
that locker," he commanded.

A seaman pulled back the door of the locker and disclosed the cringing
form and defiant face of Catin.

"Catin!  You!"

The man stepped forward with a smile of triumph.

"You set off the bomb?  You wanted to kill me?"

"I did my duty.  I obeyed my orders as you obey your orders.  I had no
enmity for you.  I am, in fact, sorry that you were fool enough not to
see that I was a little more than a valet."

"You are a spy, Catin?"

"Yes, sir.  And I have done my work, and I am willing to die with the
rest of you."

Pauline drew back, shuddering.  She touched Summers' arm.

"Oh, Mr. Summers, I believe--"

"What is it?"

"I believe I know of the plot.  I was in the conservatory at the naval
ball.  A man and a woman--"

"A woman?"

"Mlle. de Longeon and her diplomatic friend--you remember."

"Yes--well?"

"They talked together in whispers.  The man said 'The thing will be
done on Submarine B-2 tomorrow.'"

A look of agony that the fear of death could not have caused came into
the face of the young Ensign.

"Mlle. de Longeon?  No!"

"Yes!  Mlle. de Longeon," sneered Catin stepping nearer.  "Mlle. de
Longeon is the principal proof of my statement that you are a fool.
Mlle. de Longeon recommended me to you as a capable valet, did she
not?  Mlle. de Longeon frequently was your guest.  Now Mlle. de Longeon
has the plans of your submarine and your torpedo--plans which I took
the liberty of removing from the little cupboard over the desk in your
workroom."

Summers sprang forward but he recovered himself.

"I should have told you," wailed Pauline.

"How should you have known?" said Summers.  In a moment he had lost his
life work and his love.  Suddenly he straightened himself.  The soldier
in him mastered the man.

"There is still a chance--one little chance," he said.

"To get out?" cried Pauline.

"Yes--through the torpedo tube."

She shuddered.

"I am going to make you do it," he said, "because it is the only
chance.  The men will follow you.  Harry's boat will be near."

"And you?"

"I do not matter any more.  Come."

A gunner opened the great tube as Summers led Pauline into the torpedo
room.  Obediently she entered the strange passageway of peril and of
hope.

"Goodbye," he said, "and good luck."

"Goodbye," she answered.  "You are a brave man.  You are as brave--
you are as fine--as Harry."

From the end of the torpedo tube a woman's form shot to the surface of
the water.  Choking, dazed, but courageous, Pauline tried to turn on
her back and gain breath.  But they were well out to seat and the waves
were crushing.

"What is that?" asked Harry, pointing and passing his glasses to the
boatman.

The man looked and without a word swung the craft about and put the
engine at top speed.  And in a few moments Harry's strong arms drew her
from the water.

"My darling, what has happened?" he gasped.

"Don't think of me--think of them!" she begged, weakly.  "They were
trapped--down there.  There was a bomb--a plot--the machinery is
ruined.  Harry, help them!"

The boatman who overheard Pauline's first cry of appeal, now came
forward respectfully.  "There's a revenue cutter--the Iroquois--
coming out," he said, significantly.

Harry looked.  "Splendid!" he cried.  "Can we signal her?"

"No, but we can catch her?"

Shouts from a speeding motorboat brought the Government vessel to a
stop.  Officers came to the rail and helped Harry and Pauline to the
deck.

"Ensign Summers and his crew are sunk in their submarine.  The pumps
are gone.  There was a bomb explosion.  Can you get help?"

"Where are they?"

"You can pick up their buoy with a glass--there."

The chief officer looked through his glass.  "Yes," he said.  "You'll
come abroad, or keep your own boat?"

"We've got another piece of work to do--if we can leave our friends
to your guarding," said Harry.

"Well have the wrecking tugs and divers in twenty minutes."

Harry and Pauline climbed back to the motorboat and sped up the bay.

"What did you mean another piece of work?" asked Pauline as she clung
to his arm.

"My car is at the Navy Yard pier," was his only answer.

She still clung to him in tremulous uncertainty as the motor sped them
up through Broadway, into Fifth avenue, and on to the door of Mlle. de
Longeon's hotel.

She and the diplomatic grandee who had held the confidential conference
with her in the conservatory at the naval ball were together in her
suite.

"And you have the plans actually in your possession?" he said.

"Yes.  It has been a tedious process.  It was easy to make him fall in
love, but he is so fearfully scrupulous about his work.  It took even
his valet three months to locate the secret hiding place of the
papers."

"A little more caution mingled with his scruples and he would not now
be dead at the bottom of the bay."

"Oh, this is the day, is it?" asked Mlle. de Longeon, wearily.  "After
all, it is rather cruel to Catin."

"To die for his country?"

"Nonsense!  He dies because he knows he would be killed in a crueler
way if he refused to obey you."

The diplomat smiled.  "Will you give me the plans?"

"Yes--why, Marie, what is it?"

A maid had entered with cards.  "I am not at home today."

Mlle. de Longeon moved to her writing desk, removed from it a packet of
papers, and, with a little courtesy gave it into the eager hands of the
diplomat.

"It has been a splendid achievement, Mademoiselle," he said,
enthusiastically.  "I shall see that--what?  Who is this?" he
exclaimed, as Harry and Pauline burst into the room.

"Marie, Marie, I told you that I was at home to no one!" screamed Mlle.
de Longeon.

"How dare you intrude in these apartments?" demanded the diplomat.

"I dare, because I want those papers," declared Harry.

The packet was still in the diplomat's hands.  He tried to thrust it
into his pocket, but Harry was upon him.  They clinched, broke from
each other's grasp and struggled furiously.

As the last resource the diplomat drew the packet from his breast and
flung it across the room toward Mlle. de Longeon.  She pounced upon
it.  But Pauline was beside her.  Stronger both in body and in spirit
than the adventuress, she grasped her wrists, and in the luxurious,
soft-curtained room there raged two battles.

But the struggles did not last long.  Harry hurled his antagonist, an
exhausted wreck, to the floor, and sprang to the side of Pauline.
Throwing off Mlle. de Longeon's grasp, he picked up the packet from the
floor, and with Pauline ran from the room.

A revenue cutter was landing a group of faint and silent men, at the
pier of the Navy Yard when an automobile flashed in.

"Hurrah!  They did it!  You're safe!" cried Pauline, rushing past Harry
to greet Ensign Summers.

The officer took her extended hands gratefully, but there was no light
in his eyes as he answered.

"Safe--and dishonored," he said.  "I am only glad for my men."

"Why dishonored?" asked Harry.

"Don't you understand?"

"The man," said Pauline, curiously, "the man who placed the bomb?
Where is he?"

"Dead," said Summers.  "He broke the tube after you were released and
then attacked me with a knife.  I had to kill him."

"Good for you!" broke in Harry.  "But what's all the gloom talk for?
This stuff about dishonor?  You've proved yourself a hero, man."

"I have lost the most important documents of the Navy Department--
through a silly entanglement with a woman."

"No, you haven't.  We went and got them for you," said Harry,
presenting the packet of plans.





CHAPTER XXIII

A PAPER CHASE

In Balthazar's band, which had failed so often do away with Pauline
Marvin, there was, nevertheless, one man who had attracted the
particular interest Raymond Owen--Louis Wrentz.  Physically and
mentally brutal, he had always been one to oppose Balthazar's delays.

Six months before Owen would have shuddered at the thought of employing
this ruffian.  Then his great aim was to be rid of Pauline by the most
indirect and secret means.

But Pauline's hair-breadth escape a few weeks before from Mlle de.
Longeon's cleverly planned plot, the almost incredible rescue of the
submarine and recovery of Ensign Summers' torpedo boat plans, as well
as the fact that the year of adventure was rapidly drawing to a close
and that Harry's growing hostility and the increasing danger of
exposure at the hands of some one of his aides, made the secretary
willing to take every chance, made it imperative that he should have a
lieutenant who could be trusted to strike boldly.  Owen sent for
Wrentz.

The man appeared in the guise of a servant seeking employment, and was
brought up to Owen's private sitting-room.

"Wrentz, I want you to take charge of my work hereafter," said the
secretary.

"You mean the work of--"

Owen raised his hand in caution.  "The work of conducting a certain
person to a far country."

"But Balthazar?" questioned Wrentz.

"I am through with Balthazar.  He's done nothing but procrastinate.
All his plans have failed because it was to his profit that they should
fail."

"I'll do the work quickly.  What's your present plan?"

"A very simple one, but one that must be very shrewdly handled.  It
will mean that you and some of your friends will have to make a trip to
Philadelphia.  Where shall I be able to call you within a day or two?"

"At Stroob's lodging house, in Avenue B."

"Very well.  Be prepared to act on short notice."

"I'll stick close to the place, sir."

"And, Wrentz, understand that you are also to act firmly.  No
Balthazar, tactics.  I'm through being tricked."

"I'm sure I never failed you, sir," said Wrentz, with an aggrieved
air.

Owen smiled.  "True, but temptation occasionally leads even the most
honest of men astray," he said, sarcastically.

While this last plot was being hatched Pauline and Harry were playing
chess in the library.  As she checkmated him for the third time he
arose in mock disgust.

"They say chess is a perfect mental test.  I wonder who is the brains
of this family now?" she taunted.

"There's a difference between brains and hare-brains.  You know, I lost
because I had that Chicago thing on my mind."

"Oh, isn't that settled yet?"

"No; I'm expecting to be called up any minute with a message that will
send me out there."

"Oh, Harry!  That's terrible!  When you go to Chicago you never get
back for a whole week."

"If you like me so much, why don't you marry me and go with me on all
my trips?"

"Conceited!" she began, but her face fell again as the telephone bell
sounded.  Harry answered it, and after a few rapid questions turned to
Pauline.

"That's what it is," he said; "I go tomorrow.  I must see Owen," and
rang the bell.

"Owen," Pauline exclaimed upon his entrance, "Harry must go to Chicago
tomorrow.  Isn't it dreadful?"

"I am very sorry.  But I hope it will not be for long."

"No," said Harry, curtly.  "Look over these papers."

An hour later Owen drew from his typewriter this letter:


Miss Pauline Marvin,

Carson & Brown,
        Publishers, 9 Weston Place,
        Philadelphia.

New York.

Dear Madam:

After reading your marine story, published in the Cosmopolitan
Magazine, we have decided you are just the person to write a new serial
we have in mind.

Would you be interested to call on us at your earliest opportunity?

Yours very truly,
        J. R. Carson."


Owen sealed, addressed and, stamped the letter and enclosed it in a
larger envelope, which he addressed to a friend in Philadelphia, with
instructions to post the enclosure in that city.

He did not trust the mailing of the double letter to a servant, but,
putting on his motor togs, prepared to ride to Westbury.

"Well, he's got a reprieve; he's going to stay with us one more day,"
Pauline cried, happily, as she met Owen in the hall.

For the flash of an instant something twinged at the cold heart of the
secretary.  The bright beauty of Pauline, her happiness, her love for
her foster brother, struck home the first realization of something
missing--and never to be achieved--in his grim existence.  Perhaps
for the moment Raymond Owen had a dim understanding of the value of
innocence.

The next afternoon Pauline stood on the veranda bidding Harry goodbye.

"I hate to go, Polly, but I must," he said.  "I hate to leave you with
that--secretary."

"Harry, please don't start again on that.  You know I don't agree with
you, and--and I don't want to quarrel with you when you're going
away."

"Very well," he said, embracing her, "but don't get into any of your
scrapes while I am away.  Remember, it's a long way to Chicago."

"And Tipperary," she laughed.  "Goodbye, darling boy, and run home the
minute you can."

"I will. Goodbye."

Pauline had turned dejectedly back toward the house when the sound of
steps on the walk drew her attention.  It was the postman.

"I'll take them," she said, extending her hand.

She ran over the envelopes swiftly until she came to one which bore the
corner mark of a publishing concern in Philadelphia.  She had never
heard of the firm of Carson & Brown, but, to her enthusiasm of young
authorship, the very name "publisher" was magical.  She opened the
letter hastily and read.

For a moment she stood spellbound with happiness.  The realization of
her dreams was at hand.  Publishers were calling for her work instead
of sending it back when she sent it to them.

With a glad cry, and waving the treasured letter, she rushed out into
the garden to Owen.

"It's happened!" she sang, gaily.  "I am discovered."

"You are what, Miss Pauline?"

"Don't you understand?  Can't you see?"

"Not exactly, while you slant that letter above your head like a
reprieve for a doomed man."

"Well, read it."  She leaned breathlessly over his shoulder as he read
the familiar lines.

"Miss Pauline, it is splendid!" he exclaimed.  "I was always sure you
would be successful with your writing."

"Yes, you encouraged me to get new experiences, while Harry always
opposed me," she said.  "But, oh, I wish Harry was here to see this."

"Shall you go to Philadelphia?" inquired Owen

"Indeed--shall and instantly."

"Is it so urgent as that."

"Of course.  They might change their minds any moment and get some one
else to write the story.  Will you see what train I can take this
evening, Owen, while I run and pack a few things?"

"With pleasure--but don't you think some one ought to accompany you?"

"To Philadelphia?  Nonsense.  It's just like crossing the street.
Please, Owen, don't you begin to worry about every little thing I do."

"Very well," he laughed.  As soon as she was gone he selected a time
table, and scanned the train list.  Then he took up the telephone and
called a number.

"Hello, Wrentz?"

"This is Owen.  It worked.  Be at the Pennsylvania station with your
men tonight.  And, Wrentz, if the plan I gave you fails, I leave it to
you to invent a new one.  You understand?  What?  No.  I don't want any
return this time."

Before Owen had helped Pauline into her car and bidden her goodbye,
Wrentz and his men were on watch in the railroad station.

"Goodbye and good luck."

Pauline was standing in the aisle, the porter stowing her baggage into
her drawing room, when the men entered the car.  She noted them with
curiosity.  There was nothing very sinister about them, but they seemed
obviously out of place, but the next moment she had forgotten about
them, and for the twentieth time, was reading her own story in the
Cosmopolitan.  For now, in the light of the magic it had wrought, she
was bent on studying every word--to absorb the power of her own
genius, so to speak--in order that "her publishers" should not be
disappointed in the forthcoming novel.

When Pauline got off the train at Philadelphia she did not notice that
one of the four men who had aroused her curiosity walked behind her as
she left, or that he was joined by the three others in the taxicab
which followed hers.

When she left the cab at one of the fashionable hotels, Wrentz alone
followed her.

He was at Pauline's elbow when she registered.  As she followed the
bell boy through the lobby, he stepped to the desk, and, noting the
number of Pauline's room--NO. 22--he signed his name under hers
with a flourish.

"By the way," he said easily to the clerk, "is that pet room of' mine
vacant--the one I had last year?"

The clerk smiled.  "I'll see," he said.  "I had forgotten it was your
pet room.  I can't remember everybody."

"Oh, I was just here for a few days," said Wrentz.

"I remember you."

"Yes, sir; 24 is yours," said the clerk.  "Front."

Wrentz stood at the cigar counter to make a purchase.  He did not wish
to follow Pauline so closely that she might know he had taken the room
next to hers.

In spite of her excitement, Pauline slept soundly that night.  The next
morning she had breakfast in her own room and at ten o'clock was ready
to go to "Carson & Brown's."  She was considerably provoked by the
ignorance of the hotel clerk, who not only did not know the publishing
house of Carson & Brown, but could not even direct her to Weston
place.  He called the head porter and taxicab manager.  The latter had
an idea.

"I don't think it's Weston Place, but there's a Weston Street down in
--well, it's not a very good section of the city, Miss.  I wouldn't
want to--"

"Never mind.  In New York some of our best publishing houses are
perfect barns.  You may call a taxicab."

"Yes, Miss."

"Publishing house in Weston Street-whew!  But she doesn't look crazy,"
he instructed one of his chauffeurs.  "I don't know what the game is,
but it's a good job."

Pauline's spirits revived as the cab whisked her through the big
business streets, newly a-bustle with their morning life.  She had a
sense of pity for the workers hastening to their uninspiring toil.  How
few of them had ever received even a letter from a publisher!  How few
had known the thrill of successful authorship!

A few moments after Pauline's departure Louis Wrentz and his companions
set to work.

Two of the men left the room and sauntered to opposite ends of the hall
where they lingered on watch. Wrentz and the other man stepped out
briskly and each with a  screwdriver in his hand began unfastening the
number-plates over the doors of rooms 22 and 24.

A low cough sounded down the corridor and they quickly desisted from
their task and retired to their room while a maid passed by.

In a moment they were out again.  Wrentz passed the number plate of 24
to his assistant, who handed back the plate Of 22.  The numbers were
refastened on the wrong doors.  The watchers were called back.

"Now," said Wrentz, "it is only a matter of waiting."

Pauline's cab passed out of the central city into the region of
factories.

"This looks like the section where the print shops are in New York,"
she said confidently to herself.

But the driver kept on into streets of dingy, ancient houses--streets
crowded with unkempt children and lined with push-carts.

"Are you sure you got the right address of them publishers, Miss?" he
asked after awhile.  "The next street is Weston and it don't look very
promisin'."

She drew the letter from her handbag and showed it to him.

"Well, that's the queerest thing I know," he said, astonished by the
letterhead.  "I've been drivin' cabs--horse and taxi--for twenty
years, and I never heard of no such people or no such place."

"Well, at least go around the corner and see.  Perhaps it is a new firm
that isn't listed as yet," said Pauline.

The driver swung the cab into a street even more bleak and bedraggled
than the one they had just traversed.  He stopped and got out.  Pauline
followed him.  A blear-eyed man, slouching on a stoop, looked up in
faint curiosity as she addressed him.

"There ain't no No. 9 Weston Street," he answered.

"It usta be over there, but it's burnt down."

Pauline's face fell.  "Well, this is certainly stupid," she exclaimed.
"Of course it isn't Weston Street; it's Weston Place, as the letter
says."

"But my 'City Guide' ain't got no such place in it, miss," answered the
chauffeur.

"Well, I'll go back to, the hotel," she said dejectedly.

She was on the verge of tears as she left the elevator and started for
her room.  She had looked through all the directories and street guides
and knew at last that she had been the victim of a cruel hoax.  All her
joy and pride of yesterday had turned to humiliation and grief.  She
wanted to be alone--and have a good cry.

She was puzzled for a moment as she drew her key from her handbag and
glanced at the numbers on the doors.  She had been almost sure that No.
22 was the left-hand door, but she had been in such excitement that
she could not trust any of her impressions.  She started to place the
key in the lock of the right-hand door.

Like a flash it opened inward and two pairs of hands gripped her.  Her
cry was stifled by a hand over her mouth.  She was dragged into the
room.





CHAPTER XXIV

THE MUMMY'S LAST WARNING

Pauline had barely time to recognize in her new captors the four
strange men who had attracted her attention on the train, before a
bandage was drawn over her eyes, another over her mouth, and cruel,
heavy hands began to bind her limbs.

As she listened to the rough voices of the men, the mystery of the
"Carson & Brown" letter was entirely cleared away.

"That was easy," commented Wrentz.

"Easier than the rest of the work will be," said one.

"Shall we leave her on the floor, boss?" asked another.

"Yes, of course."

"Then I'll put a pillow under her head."

"Pillow?  Why a pillow?  Since when did you become tender-hearted,
Rocco?"

Rocco scowled, but he made no reply.

"You don't need any pillows or Pullman cars on the way to heaven," said
Wrentz with a snarling laugh.

The laugh was checked abruptly by a rap on the door.  For an instant
the ruffians looked at each other in alarm.  There was no telling
whether to open that door would be to face the drawn revolvers of
detectives or only the expectant eyes of a bellboy.

There was nothing to do but to answer, however.  Wrentz moved to the
door.

"Who is it?" he asked.

"Your trunk, sir."

"You are the porter?"

"Yes, sir."

"Well, you can leave the trunk at the door.  I am too busy to be
interrupted just now.  But here--"

Wrentz opened the door an inch and passed a dollar bill to the porter.
"I am going to need you again in a few hours," he said.

"Yes, sir; thank you, sir."

"Move the girl over behind the bed--out of range there," commanded
Wrentz.  Two men seized Pauline and dragged her across the room where
she could not be seen through the door, which Wrentz now opened wide.

In the corridor outside stood a large trunk.  Wrentz and one of the men
lifted it and carried it into the room.

"Your baggage is light," said the man.

"It will be heavier in a little while.  Open it."

They obeyed.

"Do you think it is large enough?" asked Wrentz.

"Large enough for what--the girl?" demanded Rocco, who had been
sulking since his rebuke.

"You are shrewd, Rocco.  You have guessed rightly I suppose you'll want
to put a pillow in it."

"Yes, I would," said Rocco, who was the youngest of the band, "or else
I would kill her first.  What is the use of torture?"

Wrentz's dark fact grew even blacker as he eyed the young man.

"If you were a grown man, Rocco," he said, "instead of a soft-hearted
boy, you would know that there is one form of murder that is always
found out--the trunk murder.  And I want to say this to you," he
added with growing heat, "that if I hear one more word of rebellion
from you this prisoner will be alive some hours after you have
departed.  Now, then, into the trunk with her."

Rocco sullenly helped the others in the grim task.  The trunk, large as
it was, was not deep enough to permit Pauline a sitting posture, nor
long enough to prevent the painful cramping of her limbs.  But she was
deadened to physical pain.  With the words of her doom still ringing in
her ears--the calm discussion of her death--her terror was her
torture.  The choking gag, the cutting bonds, the stifling trunk--in
which the knife of Wrentz had cut but a few air holes--these were as
nothing to the agony of her spirit--the agony of a lingering journey
toward a certain but mysterious end.

Pauline had been a prisoner before, had been through many and desperate
dangers, but her heart had never failed her utterly until she felt the
pressure of the trunk lid on her bent shoulders and heard the clamping
of the locks that bound her in.

She could still hear the voices.

"I'll go down and settle my bill and send up that porter," Wrentz was
saying.  "Don't let him help with the trunk, except to run the
elevator.  You're sure your car is at the side entrance--not out in
front?"

"Yes."

"I will meet you there."

Pauline had been so carefully bound that she could not stir in the
trunk.  As she felt it lifted and carried rapidly through the corridor
to the hotel elevator she strained with all her might to make a noise
--to beat with hands or feet or even with her head, the sides of the
receptacle.  But it was no use.  She was carried through the hotel and
out to the side entrance without attracting attention.

She felt the trunk lifted over the men's heads, and the whirring of an
automobile told her that she was being placed in the machine.

"Well, you didn't care much for your pet room this time, Mr. Wrentz,"
smiled the clerk as Wrentz asked for his bill.

"Indeed I did, but a message has called me back to New York."

He paid his bill and hurried out to the big car in the back of which
Pauline's trunk had been placed.  Springing to the wheel, he ordered
his followers in, and they drove away.

Once on suburban roads, Wrentz, either fearful of pursuit or drunk with
success, began speeding.

Along the railroad tracks the noise of their speed drew a tumult of
wild sounds from a string of gaily painted cars on the siding.  The
snarls and howls of beasts were mingled with the angry cries of men who
seemed to be at work on the other side of the cars.

To Pauline the noises came faintly, but with a horrid and unearthly
note.  She, who had been the victim of so many cruet and fantastic
plots, knew not what new danger the roaring of the beasts threatened.

In a moment, though, her mind was set at rest on this point.  For
Rocco, the young bandit, turning to the man next him, asked: "What does
it mean?  What are they doing?"

"It is a circus train," answered the man.  "They are loading the beasts
into the cars."

Pauline felt the machine swerve sharply and evidently take to a
by-road, for she could hear the swish of leaves on overhanging branches
as they brushed through.

"This place will do," she heard Wrentz say.  "Now, be quick about it."

"It has come," breathed Pauline to herself.  "This is the place where
I am to die."

Through her mind, in piteous pageant, flashed thoughts of home, of
Harry, of even Raymond Owen.  There was a great loneliness in the hour
of doom.  But it would be over quickly.  She shut her eyes tight and
clenched her tied hands as the trunk was taken from the machine and
placed upon the ground.

"Open it," commanded Wrentz.  "I don't want her to die in there."

The men quickly unclamped the locks and lifted Pauline out.

"Take off the ropes and the bandages," ordered Wrentz.

"Take them off?  Why, she'll scream," exclaimed one.

"If she does you may choke her to death in the car," replied Wrentz.

"Why not here?" asked the oldest of the men.  "Didn't Mr. --"

"Hush your mouth!  You confounded rascal!" Wrentz screamed.  "Are you
going to mention that name here?"

"What harm--as long as she is to die?  Dead women tell no more tales
than dead men."

"I will name all names that are to be spoken," declared Wrentz.

"Well, he of the name that is unspoken--at least he did say that we
must have no delays.  We want to earn our money as well as you, Louis
--remember that."

"Come, come," he said.  "This is no way to be arguing among friends.
You'll get your money all right; but there is one thing to remember-you
ain't get it except through me.  So let me handle the matter.  Put the
girl in the car."

Pauline, although her bonds had been cut away, was unable to rise to
her feet.  They lifted her to her feet.  She took a step or two, while
they watched her curiously.  Quickly strength and self-control came
back to her.  With a sudden spring, she struck at Wrentz with her fist,
and as he drew back, astonished she darted across the roadway toward
the wood.

It was but a futile, maneuver.  She had gone but a few paces when she
was gripped from behind and snatched back.

"You see, Louis--I told you she would do something of the kind," said
the old bandit.

"And I told you it would do no harm.  Place her in the car between you
and Rocco.  If she screams or makes a move to get away you may do as
you wish, but not until then."

Pauline still struggled feebly as she was lifted into the machine.
Wrentz kicked the empty trunk to the side of the byroad and took the
wheel again.  He drove back to the main drive that skirted the
railroad.

Distant as they were by now, the clamor of the caged beasts in the
circus train could still be heard.  To Pauline the creatures seemed
less wild and cruel than these, her human captors.

Wrentz put on even greater speed than he had ventured before.  Two
policemen, Burgess and Blount, of the Motorcycle Squad, were standing
by their wheels in the roadway when the sound of the car's rush reached
their ears from half a mile away.

"By George, that fellow's coming some," exclaimed Blount.

"And looks as if he wasn't going to stop," said the other.  "Halt!
Halt, there!" he commanded, as the machine flashed up in a mantle of
dust.

"They are coming, Louis," said one of the men.

"I know they are.  But there is no machine made that can catch this
one.  Have your guns ready, though.  In case they begin to fire, pick
them off."

Pauline shuddered at the matter-of-fact way in which Rocco and the man
on the other side drew their heavy pistols from their hip pockets and
rested them on their knees.

"Do you see the girl in that car?" yelled Burgess to his companion over
the din of their streaking machines.

"Yes.  We want that party for more than speeding, I guess," answered
Blount.  They bent low over their handle-bars and raced on.

"If he takes the 'S' curve like that we've got him--dead or alive,"
said Burgess.

"And it looks as if he would.  By George, he is!"

Wrentz's car had shot suddenly out of sight around a twist in the
road.  Wrentz was an able driver, and, even at its terrific speed, the
machine took the first turn gracefully.  But Wrentz had not counted on
a second shorter turn to the opposite direction.  And he worked the
wheel madly for a second swerve; the huge car skidded, spun round, and,
reeling on two wheels for an instant, turned over in the ditch.

It was several moments before Pauline opened her eyes.  She shut them
quickly and staggered to her feet shuddering--she had been lying
across Rocco's dead body which had broken her fall and saved her life.

Two other men lay motionless in the road.  But from under the
overturned car there came a sound, and Pauline realized, with quick
alarm, that Wrentz was still alive.  She ran across the road and into
the parked woods that hid the railroad from the drive.

Wrentz struggled out from beneath the car.  His eyes swept swiftly from
the bodies of his dead comrades to the form of Pauline just vanishing
in the thicket.  He was bruised and bleeding, but with the instinct of
a beast of prey he followed his quarry.

"Dead or alive was right," said Burgess, jumping from his wheel and
examining the bodies in the road.  "I wonder what that fellow was up
to.  And where is the girl?"

"I saw her and one of the men make into the park there," said Blount.
"You take charge here and I'll go after them."

As he moved into the thicket in the direction Pauline had taken young
Blount's attention was attracted by a new commotion.  The park was on
the crest of a steep cliff overlooking the railroad tracks and from the
tracks came a riot of voices.  Blount forced his way through the wood
to a viewpoint from the cliff.  Below him a score of men were moving
rapidly along the tracks in wide, open order, evidently bent on some
sort of a hunt.

"The circus men," said Blount to himself.  "An animal must have got
out.  This is certainly some day for business."

He turned back to the work in hand.

Pauline, spurred by terror as she realized that Wrentz was again upon
her trail, had sped like a wild thing through the park paths.  She
could hear the heavy footsteps of her pursuer close behind.  She could
hear also a shouting from afar off.  She made toward the shouting--
the sound of any voice but the voices of the inhuman men who had
planned her death was welcome to her ears.

She came out upon the cliff where it sloped steeply to the railroad
yards, but not too steeply to prevent her descending.  From her
position, the lines of freight cars cut off from her vision the strange
group of hunters who were shouting.  Running, stumbling, creeping,
clutching at small bushes, she scrambled down the cliff.

"Stop and come back!" she heard a menacing voice behind her.  She sped
on the faster.

A line of high bushes fringed the bottom of the cliff.  Between the
bushes and the first rails ran a ditch.  Sheltered from all view from
above, Pauline dragged herself along this ditch, seeking a hiding
place.  She knew her strength was almost gone.  She was in terror of
fainting.  If she could hide somewhere and rest--

A single empty freight car stood on the outer track a hundred yards
away.  Its open door offered the only means of concealment that she
had.  She believed that the bushes were high enough still to shield her
while she climbed into the car.

In this she was wrong.  Wrentz, watching from above--for he was
afraid of the voices on the tracks, below and had not followed Pauline
--watched with pleasure as she crawled to the side of the car, and,
after two failures, managed to drag herself through the high door.  She
sank exhausted.  Gradually, however, her strength returned.  Her mind
recovered from the dazing experiences of the last few hours.  She began
to gain courage and to plan her further flight.

As she moved toward the car door to reconnoiter, the sense of an
invisible presence suddenly possessed her.  Instinctively she turned.

One glance behind her and every fiber of her body seemed to turn to
stone.  Fear she had known, but never terror such as this.  She stood
paralyzed, unable to close her eyes, unable to move.  For there beside
her, towering above her in horrible strength, with wildly grinning face
and cruelly outreaching claws, stood the thing that gave explanation to
the hunt outside and the shouting.  Pauline was in the clutches of a
gorilla.  She fainted as she felt herself gripped in the hairy arms.

Wrentz was gloating as he stood on watch over Pauline's hiding place.
In a little while the men, would be out of the railroad yard and he
would go down and finish the work.  But his rejoicings were turned into
amazement by the sight which now presented itself at the door of the
car.


With Pauline, carried over one arm as if she had been a wisp of straw,
the gorilla was crawling down to the trackside.  Wrentz saw it crawl
along the ditch and heard the crunch of broken bushes as the huge
creature clambered up the cliff.

Wondering, scarcely able to believe his eyes, Wrentz followed at a safe
distance.

Young Policeman Blount, searching for the fugitive chauffeur of the
wrecked automobile and the mysterious young woman who had escaped from
it, paused at the sound of heavy foot-falls.  A low, guttural, snarling
sound--a sound hardly human--accompanied the footsteps.  He had
reached the bottom of the cliff a half mile from where Pauline had
found her perilous shelter.  Peering up through the bushes, his
astonishment and horror were a match for the astonishment and joy of
Wrentz.  The gorilla, with Pauline still clutched in the mighty paw,
had reached almost the top of the cliff at its steepest point.

Blount blew his whistle, blast after blast.  He started up the cliff,
but came back at the sound of hurrying footsteps and calls; the hunters
from the railroad yards had heard the signal.

"Hello!  Have you seen anything of the gorilla?" yelled the first man
to come up.

Blount pointed up the cliff side to where the hideous beast was just
dragging Pauline over the topmost ledge.

The men stood spell-bound with pity.

"A girl!" gasped one of them.  "She's as good as dead, if she isn't
dead now.  He just killed our foreman back in the yards."

"No, thank heaven!" cried Blount, "she's not dead.  Look!"

At the top of the cliff they saw Pauline's form suddenly quicken into
life.  The gorilla had released its hold upon her to make sure of its
footing on the perilous ledge.  Now she stood, a frail, pitiful,
hopeless thing, fighting--actually assailing the beast, more mighty
than a dozen men.

Their hearts sick within them they watched the brief struggle.  Wrentz,
too, watched it, from his hiding place on the top of the cliff.  But
his heart was not sick.  In a moment, he was sure, his work would be
accomplished for him, and his employer would be rid of Pauline Marvin
in a way that could reflect no blame on any one.

Blount started up the cliff.  He took it for granted that the others
would follow, but looking down after gaining half the distance, he saw
the circus men still huddled together in fascinated awe.

"Look!  Look!" they called to him.  "He's taking her up the tree."

Blount looked and saw the gorilla climbing ponderously the trunk of a
large tree, the branches of which overhung the precipice.  Blount
climbed on frantically.  He stopped again.  The gorilla was crawling
out upon one of the overhanging branches!  The strange beast-brain had
conceived a death for Pauline more terrible than any Raymond Owen bad
ever plotted.  Wrentz himself might have envied the gorilla.

Blount drew his revolver.  He was not more than a hundred feet below
them now.  "It's the chance of hitting her against the chance of saving
her," he muttered.  He fired.  With a snarl of pain the gorilla turned
and bit savagely at its shoulder.  Blount rushed on.  He stopped again
and fired.  He was at the verge of the cliff.  He could blaze away now
with no danger of hitting Pauline, for he was a sure marksman.

With a great throb of joy in his heart the gallant young fellow saw the
beast turn, and, leaving Pauline with her arms around the limb, her
eyes shut against the dizzy depths below, move back and scramble down.

Blount was on the cliff-top as the gorilla reached the ground.  The
beast charged.  Blount fired again.  Again the gorilla, snarling, bit
at its wounded side, but it came an as if a dozen lives vitalized the
gross body.

Blount backed away from the cliff, but the monster was upon him.  It
clutched him, hurled him to ground, dragged him back to the dizzy
verge.

Slowly Blount was pressed over the precipice.  The watchers below saw
him in his last struggle writhe in the deathly grasp, twist his
revolver and fire three shots into the heart of the gorilla.

Down the long fall to the jagged rocks went the beast.

Pauline was bending over the bleeding, battered form of the young
officer when the circus crew reached them.

"Oh, you are brave, brave!" she cried.

He opened his eyes and grinned merrily.  "If I'm brave, I'd like to
know what you are."

"Oh, I'm not brave,  I'm nothing but a selfish little pig," cried
Pauline.  "I've treated the dearest fellow in the world shamefully.
He's forgiven me over and over, but he won't forgive me this time."

"He'll forgive you anything, Mim," Blount assured her, "for the sake of
getting you safe back.  But I shouldn't like to be the man who got you
into this, when he hears of it."

"The man's safe enough," said Burgess, who had just up in time to hear
Blount's last words.

"No, he didn't escape that way," as Blount uttered an ejaculation of
disgust.  "He ran full tilt into me and when I tried to arrest him he
drew his revolver on me.  By good luck I got him first--yes, Jo, he's
dead."

"Dead," repeated Pauline in a low tone.  "How horrible to go out of
life a moment after you had tried to commit murder."

"It's not his first," Burgess said coolly.  "We've been after him and
his gang these six months.  It was Wrentz, Jo, and I made a haul of
papers that'll get somebody into trouble."

"Oh, don't hurt the young one," cried Pauline.  "He tried to help me."

"Rocco?  He was dead when they picked him up.  And, now, Miss Marvin,
hadn't I better get you a taxi?"

"Yes, thank you, but," with irrepressible curiosity, "how did you know
me?"

Burgess smiled.  "How did I know you?  I beg your pardon, Miss, but for
nearly a year your picture's been in every paper, more or less, in the
United States.  You're a big head-liner--it's an honor to meet you,
face to face.  But it's Blount has all the luck.  He's saved you--he'll
be a head-liner himself tomorrow."

The hot color rushed over Pauline's face.  "A head-liner"--so that
was what she meant to the public, to the man on the street.

"Please, Please, don't let this get into the Papers," she begged.
"I'll do anything in the world for you if you'll just keep it out of
the papers."

"Will you tell us about those other adventures?"

Burgess asked eagerly.  "It's a sure thing that somebody's been pulling
the wires, making you walk the tight rope, and somebody that knows
everything you do.  Any man on the force who could spot him would be
made."

"No, no," Pauline insisted, an uneasy remembrance of Harry's suspicions
lending emphasis to her denial.  "Some of those things were done before
anybody out of the house could know."

"Just as I said," Burgess agreed triumphantly.

"It's somebody in the house.  Why he knew about your bull terrier, and
the papers had it had just been given you the day before--darned
clever little dog to give your folks the clue."

"Cyrus?" Pauline's face broke into smiles and dimples.  "He's the
cleverest, dearest, most beautiful dog in the world."

"Fine dog, yes Miss, if he's like the picture the reporters got."

Pauline's face clouded--for the moment she had forgotten the horrors
of publicity.

"You won't put this in the papers?" she pleaded.

"He shan't," Blount raised himself weakly on his elbow.  "If the
reporters haven't got it already, we'll keep you out of it anyhow,
Miss."

"Keep a scoop like this out of the papers?" Burgess laughed aloud.
"You're talking through your hat, Blount, it can't be done."

In one terrible flash Pauline saw her name in capitals, her photograph
almost life-size, photographs of her trunk, the gorilla, Blount, in
head-liners, too, and Harry, furious, too far away for moral suasion;
stern, cold, unforgiving, worse still, disgusted.  She realized as she
had never realized before that Harry was what counted most, Harry was
the one thing she could not live without.  To the terrors of these
hours was added the terror of losing him.

She burst into wild sobs.

"I want Harry, I don't want anything in the world but Harry!  Oh, take
me home, please take me home!"

Burgess got a taxi and went with her to the hotel, where She was put to
bed, a doctor sent for, and where at last she fell asleep.

But it was not until noon the next day that she was able to take the
train for New York.  And then began, two hours and a half that Pauline
remembered to the last hour of her life.  Her photograph stared at her
from the front page of every daily paper--even the glasses and thick
veil she wore to conceal her identity could not soften the conspicuous
pictures.  Newsboys called her name, and the gorilla story, Wrentz, and
Blount's names, together--every passenger in the car, it seemed to
her, men, women, and children, were discussing her.  There were silly
jokes, contemptuous criticism, half-laughing suggestions that there was
something "queer about Miss Marvin." just behind her, she heard one
woman say to another, "But, then, my dear, what could you expect of any
girl whose mother was an Egyptian" as if this equaled breaking the
whole Decalogue.

Though she had wired Owen, the motor did not meet her, and feeling more
than ever forlorn and forsaken, Pauline got into a taxi.  Never had the
old place looked so beautiful as today when she felt that it could
never be her home again--she must tell Harry that her mother was an
Egyptian and then even if he could forgive her this last adventure he
would never marry her.  Oh, how could she have been so silly, so
conceited, so cruel to Harry!  And what a fool she had been to go in
search of experience in order to write.  If she couldn't write with all
this beauty spread out before her, if she couldn't write by living a
real, human, everyday life, the sort of life that brings you close to
normal people, how could she ever hope to write by living on excitement
--on abnormal excitement and with abnormal people and situations?

She paid the driver and was walking slowly up the steps of the veranda,
when, suddenly, she halted as if she had been struck.  What was that?
It couldn't be--yes, it was--funeral streamers hanging from the
door-knob!

With a scream that rang through the closed door, Pauline fainted.  When
she recovered consciousness she was in the library.  Bemis and Margaret
were bending over her, and strong, tender arms were around her.

"Harry," she murmured instinctively.

"Don't try to talk, my darling, drink this.  You go," to Bemis and
Margaret.

"Oh, Harry, I thought you were dead."

"I'm very much alive," Harry said with a tremulous laugh.

"But Harry, what does all that black on the door mean?"

"It means," said Harry, savagely, "that though the mills of the gods
grind slowly they grind surely--Owen's dead."

"Owen!"  Her eyes large with terror, Blount's words ringing in her ears--
"I shouldn't like to be the man at the bottom of this when Mr. Marvin
hears of it."  "'Owen," she repeated in a breathless whisper.

"Harry, you didn't kill him?"

"He didn't give me the chance.  He was dead when I got here--overdose
of morphine Dr. Stevens said.  Seems he was a drug fiend."

"Why that was the reason," Pauline said, her filling with tears.  "He
was crazy, he didn't know what he was doing.  Poor Owen, poor Owen"--
then turned hastily to safer topics.  "But I thought you went to
Chicago for a week."

"I did, but, you'll laugh, Pauline--I know it sounds fool--the
Mummy came to me just as she came to me in Montana.  I took the first
train home.  I knew you were in danger--I knew it was a warning.
I'll ever trust, you out of my sight again--you've got to marry me
now."

Pauline shrank back from his kisses.  "No, no, Harry I can't--I won't
--there was a woman on the train said my mother was an Egyptian."

Harry broke into a peal of laughter and caught her in his arms.

"Is that the only reason you won't?"

"Harry, is it true?"

"I don't know and I don't care--what difference does it make who your
mother was?  You are you, that's all I care for."  His voice shook.  "I
love you so, Pauline, that I can't stand this life any longer--another
adventure--"

Pauline silenced him with a kiss.

"I'm all through with adventures," she declared.  "Harry, I'm going to--"

"Marry me?  Polly, do you mean it?"

"Yes, yes.  Oh, my dearest, I've been a selfish, silly, conceited
little pig, but I'm cured, I'm cured at last."

As he clasped her in his arms, the shutter swung violently to, and the
case containing the Mummy fell with a clatter to the floor.  Harry ran
and lifted it as tenderly as if it had been a little child.

"I suppose we can hardly keep her here," he said regretfully, "but
we'll give, no, I can't give her up entirely, we'll lend her to the
Metropolitan Art Museum where she'll receive due honor.  She's been a
faithful friend to us, Polly."

"And here's another," exclaimed Pauline, as Cyrus ran frantically into
the room, and leaping upon the couch with ecstatic barks of welcome,
threatened again to take the place that belonged by right to Harry.
But this time Harry joined in Pauline's caresses.

THE END






End of Project Gutenberg's The Perils of Pauline, by Charles Goddard

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE PERILS OF PAULINE ***

***** This file should be named 6065.txt or 6065.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.net/6/0/6/6065/

Transcribed by Sean Pobuda

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.net/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.net

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.net),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.net

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
